---
section: Work Health and Safety
nav_order: 2
title: 1.2 Drugs and Alcohol
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To ensure the health and safety of all SLSSA members by prohibiting the use of tobacco, alcohol, and drugs while on duty or representing the organisation. This commitment is rooted in the medical evidence linking substance use to significant health risks and the potential for impaired performance in lifesaving operations.

## Overview

This SOP outlines the restrictions on smoking, alcohol consumption, and drug use for SLS personnel, emphasising the importance of maintaining a safe environment during active duties. It details the responsibilities of personnel regarding substance use and the consequences for non-compliance, including disciplinary action and potential referral to authorities for illegal drug use.

SLSSA is committed to protecting members from the harmful effects of drugs, including nicotine, and alcohol. This is supported by medical evidence linking smoking (both passive and active) and alcohol to diseases like lung cancer and heart disease. SLSSA ensures, as far as reasonably practicable, a safe environment for all members.

This Procedure serves as a practical guide to understanding and managing drugs and alcohol within your club. While it provides essential information and recommended practices, it is not a substitute for the obligations and responsibilities that the Person Conducting a Business or Undertaking (PCBU) must uphold under the Work Health and Safety (WHS) Act. Clubs must ensure compliance with all legal requirements, and this guide should be used to complement, not replace, the mandatory duties outlined in the legislation.

### Smoking

Smoking while on active lifesaving duties is not permitted including in any SLS property, SSV, powercraft or any other SLS vehicles. This includes tobacco, e-cigarettes (vapes) and any other substance.

Smoking of any substance is prohibited in all SLS buildings, facilities, and vehicles. SLS personnel must not smoke while in uniform, in the public’s view or while representing the organisation.

Smoking brings with it additional hazards in terms of fire safety. SLS personnel must ensure others do not smoke near oxygen equipment, fuel or in other circumstances where there is an increased risk of fire or explosion.

### Alcohol

Alcohol must not be consumed whilst wearing any patrol or Emergency Operations Group uniform.

SLSSA personnel must not undertake patrolling duties, incident response (including emergency callouts), operate any SLS vehicles or powercraft, if their blood alcohol level is greater than 0.05%, except provisional drivers who must have blood alcohol limit of 0% when driving.

SLSSA personnel acknowledge and agree that they may be breath tested at any time to ensure they are meeting these requirements.

### Drugs

SLS personnel are responsible for monitoring their own condition and communicating any (relevant) changes in medical state to their Patrol Captain or supervisor.

The use of drugs prescribed by a doctor for medicinal or recuperative purposes may be taken, however the Patrol Captain or supervisor must be advised as to the type of medication and all possible side effects.

If these prescribed drugs affect your wellbeing or impair or disrupt your senses, you must advise the Patrol Captain or supervisor immediately and cease patrol duties until you have completed the prescribed course of medication.

The improper use of non-prescription and/or prescription drugs during duties is prohibited.

SLS personnel must not present themselves for duty whilst under the influence of any prohibited substance.

No member is permitted to undertake active lifesaving duties including the operation of SLS vehicles or vehicles whilst under the influence of any prohibited drugs and substances.

SLS personnel must adhere to all legal blood alcohol limits for the operation of gear and equipment, including any type of lifesaving vehicles, SSVs, e-bikes and Powercraft of all types and UAVs.

Persons impaired by drugs and/or alcohol are not permitted to operate gear and equipment under any circumstances.

SLS personnel who present themselves for duty whilst suspected to be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs may be immediately suspended from duties and referred for disciplinary action.

Any SLS personnel who knowingly allows a person to carry out duties whilst under the influence of alcohol and/ or drugs may also be subject to disciplinary action.

Cases that indicate evidence of illegal drug use will be referred to the appropriate authorities for investigation.

### References

- [Work Health and Safety Act 2012](https://www.legislation.sa.gov.au/LZ/C/A/WORK%20HEALTH%20AND%20SAFETY%20ACT%202012.aspx)
- [Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012](https://www.legislation.sa.gov.au/lz?path=%2Fc%2Fr%2Fwork%20health%20and%20safety%20regulations%202012)
- [Guidelines for Safer Surf Clubs v4 May 2020, Chapter 3 – Common Hazards in the Surf Club Environment](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/3373)
