---
section: Media - Critical Incidents
nav_order: 3
title: 15.3 Member Welfare - Critical Incidents
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline Surf Life Saving SA’s approach to member welfare following a critical incident.

## Overview

The environment in which SLS operates has the potential for members to be involved in incidents of a traumatic nature. Such incidents could include the loss of life, the provision of emergency care, search and rescue operations, or a serious incident involving fellow members. SLSSA has implemented a strong framework of support to ensure that members are cared for and receive appropriate support.

Members are affected differently by incidents, and it is the reaction of the individual which makes the incident critical for that person, not necessarily the size or nature of the incident.

SLSSA is committed to lessening the impact of critical incident stress on members, staff and their families by providing best practice support following an incident.

## Procedure

The following procedure should be read in conjunction with the SLSSA Critical Incident Management Support Procedures which provides further background, context and support for its implementation (including details of what a Group Briefing Session and welfare check entails).

- The Duty Officer, State Operations Centre or Lifesaving Department may determine the support required for member welfare according to the incident details.
- When the response to the incident has concluded, the Duty Officer (or other person) delivers the Group Briefing Session and conducts a welfare check where possible. The Operational Debrief often takes place at this time.
- As part of the Group Briefing Session, members involved in the critical incident are advised that they will be contacted for a welfare check as part of standard procedures.
- Within 12 hours, Duty Officer completes Critical Incident Log, compiling a list of members directly and indirectly involved in the incident, and sends it via email to the State Operations Centre to be attached to the incident log.
- Within 24 hours the SOC forwards the members’ details to the Lifesaving Department
- Within 48 hours, the Lifesaving Department:
  - Sends each member post-incident support information via email.
  - Conducts a welfare check if this was not completed by either the Duty Officer or other person.
- Two further welfare checks will be conducted – one at approximately one-week post-incident and one at approximately one-month post- incident. These will be conducted by the Lifesaving Department.

### Referrals

Referrals can be made to professional psychological support at any stage of the process.

Referrals can be made by the Lifesaving and Emergency Operations Manager to the SLSSA Employee Assistance Program, or via the individual member’s GP.

### Major Incident Support

Throughout the season, major critical incidents may occur which require swift professional support over and above the process outlined above. In these instances, the Lifesaving Department will work directly with the SLSC to activate additional support.

### Additional Support

Some clubs and branches have additional support people or networks in place who can be contacted for support outside of the SLSSA Critical Incident Support process. These include chaplains and peer support networks.