---
section: Patrol Operations (Emergency)
nav_order: 8
title: 9.8 Body Recovery
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline considerations, roles and expectations of lifesaving services regarding body recovery operations.

## Overview

SLSSA expects SLSCs and services to align their procedures with the body recovery guidelines listed below.

## Common Submerged Body Process

A body in the water will under normal circumstances initially sink and then (over 36 – 72 hours) as the body’s cells degenerate, gas will be released and the body will float. Variables include water temperature and depth. Cold water will slow down degeneration and deeper water will compress the gases.

## Procedure

In body retrieval operations, it is not appropriate to risk life, serious injury, or significant equipment damage.

SLS personnel should always treat a body as a viable rescue/resuscitation attempt until it is otherwise obvious that the body is of a deceased nature (decomposition, tasked body retrieval etc.).

Body retrieval is the responsibility of the police, and any recovery efforts should be conducted under their direction.

SLS services may be requested to provide safety support for police body recovery operations, such as in-water assistance to police divers or recovery from rocks and cliffs. However, junior members or individuals who have recently been exposed to other traumatic incidents should be excluded from participating in body retrieval whenever possible.

Members are not obligated to participate in body recovery operations, as this is not considered a core function of lifesaving services.

Participation is entirely voluntary, and members have the right to decline involvement at any stage if they find the situation too stressful or distressing.

It is essential that members prioritise their mental and emotional well-being.

Patrol Captains should respect any decision to opt out and ensure that no member feels pressured to participate. Critical Incident Support services should be made available to those who choose not to engage or who need assistance after an incident.

### Body Recovery on Land

1. Lifesaving services involvement on land is unlikely as the body recovery should be completed by police.
2. If a body must be moved at the direction of police, SLS personnel should note any details and keep it as close as possible to the original site.
3. Minimise direct contact with the body and wear personal protective clothing (Gloves, Mask, Eye wear).
4. If necessary, ensure the body is retrieved above waterline.

### Body Recovery in Water

1. Assess the situation/risk.
2. Keep observation and apply a rescue tube to the body if appropriate (so that it does not disappear).
3. Notify police and request that they recover the body (via State Operations Centre or the on-scene Duty Officer).
4. At the direction of police, recover the body (SLS personnel should only do this as a last resort).
5. Minimise direct contact with the body.
6. If no recovery is possible then mark or note location and, if possible, maintain contact/sight of the body.

### Considerations

Always consider:

- **Management of Junior Members:** Young or inexperienced SLS personnel should have their exposure to high-risk or traumatic situations minimised. This includes avoiding their involvement in body retrieval operations, critical incident responses, or other distressing scenarios. Patrol Captains should assess the suitability of assigning such personnel to these tasks and prioritise their well-being by offering them roles that are more appropriate to their experience level. Where possible, they should be supported with mentorship and gradually introduced to more challenging duties as their experience and resilience grow
- **Members of the Public and Relatives/Friends:** Take special care to manage the presence of members of the public, including relatives or friends of those involved. Ensure their safety and, if necessary, provide them with emotional support. Keep them informed as appropriate, while maintaining control of the situation.
- **Documentation of Important Details:** Accurately record all critical details, including the time, location, and sequence of events. This information is essential for post-incident reporting and any subsequent investigations.
- **Witness Management:** Keep witnesses close to the scene if it is safe to do so, or collect their contact details if they need to leave. Ensure that their statements are documented as soon as possible to preserve the accuracy of their accounts. Witnesses may provide valuable information that could assist in the investigation or in providing clarity about the incident.

### Equipment Requirement Guidelines

Body Recovery Kits are carried by key State assets and services. It is advisable that all lifesaving services maintain a Body Recovery Kit for health and safety reasons. A Body Recovery Kit should contain the following items as a minimum:

- 1x body bag.
- 4x protective face masks (P2/N95 particulate).
- 2x pairs of arm length gloves.
- 6x biohazard bags / plastic bags.
- 2x blankets / opaque sheets.
- 1x litre of disinfectant (for decontamination).
- 1x small anchor/buoy system.

### Safety

All normal hazards associated with search and rescue operations are present in a body recovery. It is not appropriate to risk life, injury or equipment damage in body recovery operations.

The risk of infection is increased, and the use of gloves is highly recommended. Personnel involved in operational activities should be aware of the available counselling services that aid in maintaining psychological health.

### Transport Arrangements

The arrangements for transporting the deceased person will normally be the responsibility of the Police. Lifesaving resources may be requested to assist in this task (especially in remote areas). This should not interfere with the safety and rescue tasks of the lifesaving service.

### Critical Incident Debrief / Peer Support

A critical incident debrief process and peer support/psychological first aid (including Critical Incident Debriefing options) must be undertaken for any incident where members/staff have been involved / exposed to a deceased person. Refer to [SOP 15.2 – Critical Incident Debriefing](#_15.2_Critical_Incident).

## Reference

- [Emergency Management Guideline, Surf Life Saving Australia, July 2018](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/953)
- SLSSA Critical Incident Stress Reactions Booklet