---
section_id: Patrol Operations (General)
nav_order: 8
title: 8.1 Beach Management Methods and Roles
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To provide an understanding of the minimum roles and responsibilities a SLS service must undertake within their beach operations.

## Overview

SLSSA is committed to ensuring a professional working environment by providing guidance to personnel regarding service expectations.

## Procedure

### Beach Operations

1. SLS personnel must ensure the flagged primary patrol area is located in the safest possible area for swimming. The patrolled area must be under constant surveillance of lifesavers for the full duration of the patrol.
2. Patrol flags, tent, surround and the minimum number of patrolling members defined in the LSA must be on the beach except during adverse weather conditions (advantage points such as higher lookout points should be established as a roving patrol type).
3. Patrol shelters, tents or bases must be positioned to ensure full surveillance of and access to the primary and secondary patrolled areas, publicly identifiable and accessible.
4. The flagged primary patrol area should be as wide as appropriate to best manage risk, given the various factors involved (conditions, personnel, hazards).
5. Patrol flags, IRB/RWC/Boards and tubes must be positioned as close to the water’s edge as practical.
6. Lifesaving services should provide an information sign at the main access point to the patrolled area identifying the key hazards and information.
7. Appropriate hazard and information signage (mobile) must be placed at adjacent beach access points and specific hazards.
8. Lifesaving personnel must ensure the beach is in a safe and clean condition prior to setting up of the flagged patrol area. Particular attention should be made to hazardous items such as broken glass, bottles, syringes, branches, floating debris, etc.
9. In a multiple person team situation SLS personnel must be assigned patrol duties and tasks e.g. Patrolling water’s edge, tower surveillance, roving SSV patrols duties etc.
10. Lifesaving personnel should rotate roles on a regular basis, under the direction of the Patrol Captain. (e.g. every 20 minutes, to minimise fatigue/boredom and ensure full attention and efficiency)
11. All Lifesaving personnel assigned to surveillance duties must not utilise personal mobile phones or other devices which may distract attention from duties.
12. Where possible, SLS personnel should be stationed in an elevated position (mobile tower/facility tower/high point on sand dunes etc) during operation when swimmers are in the water and have the beach area, including secondary area, under observation at all times.
13. Lifesaving personnel should consider patrolling the water’s edge with a rescue tube whilst swimmers are in the water.
14. In areas where the Coastal Radio Network repeater channels are available, Channel 3 must be constantly monitored (except in the Chiton Rocks and Normanville area where Channel 2 must be constantly monitored). Channel 1 should be monitored as a redundancy option.

### Patrol Captain / Senior Lifeguard

The Patrol Captain should be someone with sound patrolling experience and who, ideally, has been a Patrol Vice-Captain for at least 2 patrol seasons. In addition to being a well-skilled subject matter expert in patrolling, the Patrol Captain is the team leader who manages his / her patrol team. This requires well developed organisational skills (e.g. to ensure shift attendance and swapping) as well as interpersonal skills to be able to appropriately interact with all team members in a culturally diverse organisation.

Before a patrol shift the Patrol Captain/Lifeguard/Club Captain must ensure that sufficient patrolling members are available to attend the upcoming patrol shift and that all compulsory awards in accordance with the Lifesaving Services Agreement (BM, IRBD, IRBC, ART, SMBM) are covered. It is recommended to do this at least three days before the next patrol shift to allow sufficient time for members to organise a swap if needed.

At the beginning of every patrol the Patrol Captain/Lifeguard must:

1. Carry out a Surf Risk Rating on the SLSA Operations App
2. Conduct a briefing with the patrol team at the start of every patrol. The briefing should cover (as [per SOP 8.3 – Patrol Briefings](../8-patrol-operations-general/8.3-patrol-briefings.md)) the following:
    1. conditions, tides, hazards (reference the Surf Risk Rating (SRR)),
    2. roles / task allocations,
    3. rostering, breaks,
    4. actions on a rescue or emergency;
    5. communications;
    6. known events; and
    7. expectations.
3. This briefing should be noted as having occurred in the notes section of the Operations App. Sign on with the Operations App and standby for a radio check with the SOC.
4. Prior to the commencement of duty, check all previous log entries and liaise with the previous Patrol Captain/Lifeguard to identify any issues (equipment or other) or hazards present (if applicable).
5. Ensure all lifesaving equipment is checked and prepared before duty with the assistance of patrol team members.
6. According to training select the safest area of beach to erect the flagged primary patrol area from an elevated observation point and/or physical test of the area (where permitted).
7. Ensure the positioning of lifesaving equipment inside/outside of the flagged patrol area is in a manner that it is readily available for emergency responses and that will not become harmful to the public.
8. Where required, ensure a proper buffer zone exists between the surf craft area and the swimming area.
9. Ensure that all lifesaving services personnel take a pro-active approach to preventative measures (i.e. Warning the public of dangers, surveying swimmers between the flags, placing of equipment in the vicinity of hazards etc.)
10. Be prepared to co-ordinate any search and rescue situation that may occur.
11. Be aware of and abide by any relevant requirements within Local Government Act or local bylaws.
12. Ensure Council ordinance signage and mobile hazard and information signage are erected (where required).
13. Ensure the correct recording of information in the Operations App, log books, report forms etc.
14. Make themselves easily accessible to the general public to answer any general enquiries.
15. Have with them a radio (handheld) at all times during patrol and monitor SurfCom.
16. Delegate roles, activities and rotations to members of patrol.
17. Allocate responsibilities in case of emergency and/or rescue.
18. Conduct a debrief with the patrol team at the end of every patrol.

### SLS Personnel

Prior to an upcoming patrol shift it is the Patrol Team Member’s responsibility to contact the Patrol Captain/ Lifeguard to advise if they are unavailable to attend the upcoming patrol shift. Organising a swap is the Patrol Team Member’s responsibility unless prior arrangements have been made at your SLSC and approved by the Club Captain. This is particularly important for those members who hold compulsory awards in accordance with the Lifesaving Services Agreement (SMPC/SMBM, BM, IRBD, IRBC, ART). It is recommended to do this at least three days before the next patrol shift to allow sufficient time to organise a swap.

During each patrol, Lifesaving service personnel must:

1. Always carry a rescue tube when patrolling the water’s edge. It is recommended that a whistle and radio are also utilised.
2. Practice the basic principles of PREPARDNESS, PREVENTION, RECOGNITION, and RESCUE on duty.
3. Report to the Patrol Captain for sign on/off in the Operations App at start/finish of patrolling operations.
4. Ensure all lifesaving equipment is erected in a secure and safe manner.
5. Proactively encourage swimmers to swim in between the red and yellow flags.
6. Warn swimmers entering the water outside of the flagged area of the danger and hazards and advise them to swim between the red and yellow flags.
7. Ensure that board riders do not enter the flagged patrol area.
8. Wear the correct patrol uniform during their rostered times.
9. Remove their uniform at the completion of their operations/duties.
10. Not leave the patrol area unless authorised by the Patrol Captain/Lifeguard.
11. Take a handheld radio when leaving the patrol area to be contactable in case of an emergency.
12. Maintain fluid intake during operations, especially on hot days.
13. Have access to required PPE.
14. Practice the basic principles of sun safety.
15. Always be polite and courteous when dealing with the public.
16. Advise Patrol Captain if feeling fatigued, ill or injured.
17. Check rescue equipment for damage or breakages and report any issues to the Patrol Captain.
18. When require, proactively advise members of the public that the patrolled area is closing (i.e. At the end of the day and/ or due to dangerous conditions etc.)
19. Advise the Patrol Captain of your absence, late arrival or early departure if needed.
20. At all times be under the direction of the Patrol Captain.

## References

- [Public Safety and Aquatic Rescue training manual, 35th Edition, Module 10 – Patrol Operations](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/8571)