---
section: Patrol Operations (General)
nav_order: 3
title: 8.3 Patrol Briefings
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline the concept of a “patrol briefings” and topics to be covered within.

## Overview

Effective beach management relies on clear and consistent communication. Patrol briefings are a critical tool for optimal planning and preparation.

- In a volunteer context, briefings should be conducted by the Patrol Captain.
- In a lifeguard setting, briefings should be led by the Senior Lifeguard or Lifeguard Supervisor.

Briefings should be held on every occasion, regardless of the anticipated level of patrolling or rescue activity.

Consistent use of briefings ensures that all team members are well-informed, aligned with operational goals, and prepared for the tasks ahead.

## Procedure

A start of patrol briefing should:

- Include all lifesaving personnel.
- Invite input and questions at any stage (open forum).
- Utilise visual aids (whiteboards/maps etc).
- Roles and responsibilities:
- Identify any new personnel that may require a full induction.
- Pair up new/inexperienced personnel with experienced personnel.
- Reiterate that personal devices are only to be used on patrol for short periods of time and only in a backward area, e.g. under the patrol tent. The Patrol Captain and designated Patrol Application User (if appointed) will use them only for purposes related to lifesaving (e.g. Operations App data entry, radar weather check).

An operational briefing may cover:

- Patrol Operations Manual (POM) if applicable
- Beachsafe App.
- Uniform check (current/meets policy, clean, practicable). Equipment checks (as a team or task personnel).
- Allocate equipment as necessary (radios, call-signs etc). Current and expected beach/water/weather conditions.
- Expected patronage.
- Identified high risk areas (areas of lateral drift, rips, holes etc). Identified high risk groups (rock fishermen, tourists etc).
- Beach management plan (surveillance positions, flag duties etc).
- Incident contingency plans (based on identified risks, who, what, where, when).
- Introduce new members/substitutes, allocate tasks , rotation information and WHS issues (Sun Safety, fluid intake etc). Public image/professionalism expectations and awareness of social media.
- Radio communications (SurfCom/Channels).
- Notify the Patrol Captain or Vice-Captain before leaving the flagged area. Always take a radio to be contactable in case of an incident.

### Patrol Debrief Procedure

At the conclusion of each patrol, Patrol Captains are strongly encouraged to conduct a debrief session, irrespective of whether any incidents occurred during the shift. This practice is essential for several reasons:

- **Review of Operations:** A debrief allows Patrol Captains and their teams to review the day's operations comprehensively. It provides an opportunity to assess what went well, identify any challenges or areas for improvement, and ensure that all operational procedures were followed correctly.
- **Feedback Collection:** Debrief sessions are an important forum for collecting feedback from all team members. This input can provide valuable insights into team dynamics, operational practices, and individual performance, contributing to ongoing professional development and team cohesion.
- **Continuous Improvement:** Regular debriefing fosters a culture of continuous improvement. By systematically reviewing each patrol, Patrol Captains can identify best practices, refine procedures, and implement enhancements that contribute to better performance and safety outcomes.
- **Team Morale and Communication:** Debriefs provide an opportunity for team members to communicate openly and discuss their experiences. This helps build morale, strengthens teamwork, and ensures that all voices are heard, which can enhance overall job satisfaction and performance.

By conducting regular debriefs, Patrol Captains contribute to the ongoing effectiveness and safety of patrol operations. It ensures that every patrol is reviewed, lessons are learned, and improvements are made, regardless of whether incidents occurred. This proactive approach supports a culture of excellence and preparedness within SLS operations.

### Patrol Changeover

Outgoing Patrol Captains should perform a debrief with the incoming Patrol Captain regarding conditions and any information relevant to the incoming patrol.

Material changes in the minimum requirements to keep the beach open (e.g. if the IRB is no longer operational) should be logged in the Operations App where available. If the Operations App is not available, the SOC must be notified via radio on channel 3.

## Reference

- [Public Safety and Aquatic Rescue training manual, 35th Edition, Module 10 – Patrol Operations, Team Briefing](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/8571)