---
section: Patrol Operations (General)
nav_order: 5
title: 8.5 Lifesaving Activities in Closed Patrol Areas
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To provide clarity for SLS activities that can be undertaken in a patrol area which has been closed to the public or in response to [SOP 9.1 – Emergency Patrol Area Closure and Evacuation](../9-patrol-operations-emergency/9.1-emergency-patrol-area-closure-and-evacuation.md).

## Overview

Training can occur in large surf conditions where the Patrol Captain believes it is safe to do so having completed a Surf Risk Rating (SRR) on the Operations App. Endorsed SLS competitions/events must continue to be guided by the specific event safety plan.

No in water lifesaving activity is to be undertaken in closed patrol areas affected by the following hazards:

- Dangerous Marine Creatures.
- Debris in the water.
- Marine pollution.
- Electrical storms.

This procedure refers to beaches under the control of SLS. Should the beach be under the control of another service (i.e. lifeguards), the lifesaving service should communicate with the appropriate person responsible and agree on the training area to be used. This may result in training and activities while there are no flagged areas for public swimming

## Procedure

For the purposes of this SOP, lifesaving activities are separated into the following areas:

1. Training of members for the SRC / Bronze Medallion
2. Training conducted for maintaining the skills of lifesavers in SLSA awards currently held
3. Training of members for Powercraft awards
4. Training conducted for surf sports

### Training of Members for the Bronze Medallion or Surf Rescue Certificate

If a closed patrol area is operating, water-based training of members for the Bronze Medallion or Surf Rescue Certificate (i.e. the award is not currently held) cannot be undertaken.

### Training Conducted for Maintaining the Skills of Lifesavers in SLSA Awards Currently Held

Members who are undertaking SLS activities for the purpose of maintaining or improving skills must adhere to the following procedure:

1. Members must be financial members and be proficient in the award (minimum Bronze Medallion / SRC).
2. Patrol Captain must conduct a SRR to ascertain if the conditions are suitable for training.
3. Prepare appropriate water safety
4. If swim or board rescue training is being conducted there is to be a minimum of one fully operational IRB, on standby as water safety.
5. The crew of the water safety IRB must be briefed on the training to be undertaken and must be ready to respond.
6. The services’ IRB on duty can be used with approval from both Patrol Captain and IRB Driver.
7. The relevant training signage should be positioned near the training area.
8. Patrol Captain to advise the SOC that the service is conducting training in a closed patrol area. e.g. “_SurfCom this is Glenelg, be advised we are currently conducting board training for the next 2 hours, over_.”
9. Should conditions or circumstances change, the Patrol Captain has the authority to suspend the training activity.
10. At the completion of training, the Patrol Captain is to advise SOC that training is now complete.

### Training of Members for Powercraft Awards

Members who are undertaking Powercraft training for new or existing awards must adhere to the following procedure:

1. Members must be financial members and be proficient in the prerequisites
2. Patrol Captain/Trainer must conduct a SRR to ascertain if training is suitable.
3. Prepare appropriate water safety.
4. Where possible one fully operational IRB should be on standby as water safety. The crew of the water safety IRB must be briefed on the training to be undertaken and must be ready to respond. The services’ IRB on duty can be used with approval from both Patrol Captain and IRB Driver, but it cannot be used for the training i.e. if one IRB is on the water the second IRB must be on standby and capable of responding.
5. The relevant training signage should be positioned near the training area.
6. Patrol Captain to advise SurfCom that the service is conducting training in a closed patrol area. e.g. “_SurfCom this is Glenelg, we are currently operating IRB training for the next 2 hours_”.
7. Should conditions or circumstances change, the Patrol Captain has the authority to suspend the training activity.
8. At the completion of training, the Patrol Captain is to advise SurfCom that training is now complete.

### Training Conducted for Surf Sports

Refer to [SLSA Policy 1.01 – Water Safety](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/929).