---
section: Patrol Operations (General)
nav_order: 6
title: 8.6 Lifesaving Vehicles on Beaches
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To provide guidelines for the safe management of vehicular traffic on beaches.

## Overview

This SOP should be read in conjunction with [SOP 5.1 – Lifesaving Vehicles](../5-gear-and-equipment/5.1-lifesaving-vehicles.md) and [SOP 5.2 – Side by Side Vehicles (SSVs)](../5-gear-and-equipment/5.2-side-by-side-vehicles-ssvs.md).

Driving on beaches is only permitted:

- Should it be approved by the local regulating authority (if applicable);
- Where the beach surface structure supports the weight of vehicles;
- Where there are no roads running immediately adjacent to the beach (except where travel across multiple beaches is required); and
- Where the driver of the vehicle has undertaken an induction, as applicable, which is recorded in Surfguard.

On-beach driving must be undertaken at the slowest safe practical operating speed.

Drivers must adhere to all speed limits and all relevant laws and regulations relating to vehicles (including registrations, speed, seatbelts, parking). Drivers of lifesaving vehicles are not exempt from any fines and infringements, including during emergencies.

Drivers and passengers must comply with council by-laws, Road Traffic Act and Australian Road Rules.

## Procedure

### Beach Access

Enter and leave the beach only at ramps and designated access points.

Beach access gates, ramps and tracks should be sign posted with appropriate driving rules and regulations specific to the area. When driving on beaches the following conditions/precautions should be taken into consideration:

- Poor visibility (sun on sand, sea spray and mist).
- Distractions from other vehicles, water and wave conditions, wildlife, fishers, beach users and swimmers etc.
- Wet sand near the wave line may be hard but an odd soft patch can send you off-course without warning.
- Know your tides, never drive along wave line on a rising tide.
- Be aware of fishers and fishing lines.
- Beware of washouts after heavy rains.
- Always park in the direction of intended travel.
- Sand tyre pressures:
  - For beach driving a reduction in tyre pressure to manufacturers specification is recommended.
  - It must be noted that tyres deflated to half normal pressure won’t respond to braking or steering as effectively.
  - Finding the correct pressure is largely trial & error for a particular vehicle with a particular load, but most vehicles place the lower limit at 16psi.
  - It is recommend to not drive on roads for extended distances with these reduced tyre pressures.

### Other Factors

Other factors that need to be considered and promoted to owners and operators of vehicles to be driven on beaches include:

- Speed of travel on beaches, especially when in close proximity to beach user;
- Ground clearance;
- Consistency of the sand;
- Other vehicles and degradation of the beach; and beachgoers;
- Driving on beaches at high tide or on narrow beaches contributes to general beach erosion and erosion of native habitats
- Driving on the beach causes sand compaction and rutting and can accelerate erosion.

### Rules of the “Road”

The following specific rules of the road must be met for driving on beaches:

1. Vehicles should have a current and valid registration. Only approved vehicles to be used.
2. Drivers must have a current and valid drivers license for the vehicle type;
3. Permit to drive on a beach (if required).
4. P-Plate must be displayed if the operator holds a P1 Drivers Licence. It is the operator’s responsibility to affix the P-Plate in and appropriate and visible spot on the vehicle and to remove it after use.
5. Headlight and hazards lights must be activated when in motion.
6. **Pedestrians, swimmers and bathers have the right of way over all vehicles**.
7. Wildlife has the right of way over all vehicles.
8. Vehicles should not be driven in the dune systems.
9. Seat belts must be worn at all times.
10. Passengers should not be carried on the outside of the vehicle.
11. Keep to the left of oncoming vehicles.
12. Use indicators when overtaking or turning (if fitted).

A driving suspension automatically means suspension of driving privileges for SLS vehicles.

### Accidents/Injuries

Drivers are responsible for reporting accidents and/or injuries as required by law.

Member Injuries must be reported to the State Operations Centre (SOC) via the [Surf Emergency Response System (13 SURF)](../12-state-operations-centre-soc-surfcom/12.2-surf-emergency-response-system-sers.md).