---
section: Patrol Operations (General)
nav_order: 7
title: 8.7 Enforcement of Local By-Laws/Regulations
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To provide guidance in relation to the practical enforcement of local by-laws/regulations.

## Overview

SLS personnel will only be responsible for enforcement functions when delegated by the relevant authority (local government) under the specifications of the Local Government Act.

Outside of a delegated authority, SLS services may provide advice and guidance to the public regarding by-laws, regulations and prohibitions in order to promote the safety of personnel and the public.

## Procedure

The enforcement of regulations will generally follow a systematic progression or escalation of information and warnings. The following outlines a series of stages a Patrol Captain/Lifeguard can work through to promote local regulations:

1. Advisory.
2. Warning.
3. Reporting.

### Advisory Stage

The advisory stage can have three sub-stages:

1. Communicate – Establish communication.
2. Inform/Educate – Provide information.
3. Advise – Provide specific advice.

#### Communicate

- Greet the person.
- Introduce yourself.
- Positive body language.
- Smile.
- Establish a rapport.

#### Inform/Educate

- Explain that the area is subject to certain rules and regulations.
- Explain that these rules are for the safety and health of all.
- Identify the authority of the regulation – i.e. Local Authority.
- Advise them of the preferred course of action.

#### Advise

- Advise the person that they would be, or are, in breach of State or local regulations.Reinforce what you would like from them as a preferred course of action.

### Warning Stage

##### Warning

- Advise the person that they may be in breach of the regulation.
- Advise them of your course of action (i.e. advising Council or police).

### Reporting Stage

#### Reporting

- Report offence to the appropriate authority, usually via the State Operations Centre (SOC).
- Record details.