---
section: Licences
nav_order: 3
title: 4.3 IRB Registration/Exemptions
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Overview

All boat users and vessels in SA, including all SLS vessels, services, and personnel, are subject to maritime regulations and legislation. Due to the nature of SLS operations, a series of exemptions have been granted to SLSSA when performing a rescue or when responding to an emergency using an IRB. All SLS vessels, services and personnel operating in SA are required to adhere to the requirements of the regulations and legislation.

## Procedure

### IRB Registration

All SLS IRBs must be registered with a Surf Lifesaving (SL) number, managed by SLSSA.

##### Registration Procedure (New IRB)

This process applies to the registering of all new or second-hand IRBs.

1. Prior to purchasing an IRB from a manufacturer/supplier/Interstate SLSC, the purchasing SLSC must contact SLSSA for instructions, including how to obtain an SL registration number.
2. The purchasing SLSC is to Supply SLSSA with the following information on their new IRB:
    1. Boat Code Certificate,
    2. Proof of purchase,
    3. HIN (Hull Identification Number),
    4. IRB Manufacturer name,
    5. Brand of motor that will be used on the IRB, and
    6. Year the IRB was manufactured.
3. The purchasing SLSC will receive an SL registration number that will need to be sign written onto the IRB in line with the [SLSA lifesaving equipment and brand guidelines,](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/12129)
4. SLSSA will complete the IRB registration process, along with an application for “exemption from payment of registration”.
5. The purchasing SLSC will receive confirmation from SLSSA that their IRB has been successfully registered and is able to be operated.
6. The SLSC must enter the IRB details and new SL registration number into Surfguard before operating the IRB.

#### Annual Registration

1. SLSSA is in charge of re-registering all SLSC IRBs. When a SLSC IRB is due to be re-registered, SLSSA will complete the process and update Surfguard accordingly. Due to the fact that SLSSA is exempt from vessel registration fees, there will be no cost charged to the SLSC. In the event that an IRB is not registered, SLSSA must be notified immediately, and the SLSC will be required to cease operations with that IRB until SLSSA has completed the registration process and the new SL number has been sign written onto the IRB.
2. If a SLSC has sold an IRB previously registered by SLSSA, the SLSC will be required to complete the IRB transfer procedure below, prior to exchanging the IRB.

#### IRB Transfer (Selling/Gifting/Disposing)

1. Prior to selling/gifting/disposing of an IRB, the SLSC must contact SLSSA.
2. SLSSA will complete the required registration paperwork and notify the SLSC once complete.
3. Following notification from SLSSA that the registration paperwork has been completed, the SLSC must remove/delete the IRB details from Surfguard.
4. If the IRB is being purchased by another SLSC within South Australia, the new SLSC will need to update its Surfguard details to reflect the acquisition of a new asset.
5. Where an IRB is sold to a party external of SLSSA, SLSSA is to be notified of the intent to sell/gift/dispose of the IRB. If the IRB is to be disposed of, SLSSA will complete and submit all appropriate paperwork to cease the registration of the IRB. If the IRB is to be sold to an external party, SLSSA will complete and submit all paperwork to have the registration changed from an SL number to a general boat registration number. It is the responsibility of the SLSC to make sure that all SL registration numbers and all associated SLS branding, wording and logos are removed from the IRB prior to transaction being completed.

### Registration Numbers

Each IRB must have its registration numbers displayed on both its port and starboard forward gunwales. The registration numbers must be affixed in block letters at least 150mm in height in either black or contrasting in colour with the hull or background.

[Boat Registration Certificate Information](https://www.sa.gov.au/topics/boating-and-marine/boat-registration/replacing-boat-registration-certificates)

SLS Registration Number Example: S L 1 2 3 S

### Minimum Safety Equipment

SLS IRBs are exempt from carrying the full complement of minimum safety equipment that normally all vessels must carry under SA regulations.

### Personal Floatation Devices (PFDs) (“Lifejackets”)

All SLS IRB personnel (Drivers and Crew) operating IRBs both in frontline lifesaving operations and IRB training must wear an approved type (Minimum level 50) lifejacket (predominately red &/or yellow), also referred to as Personal Flotation Devices (PFD’s). For the purpose of this SOP and in practice “wear” means that the lifejacket must be clipped and zipped up as per provision/design of the PFD. Lifejackets must comply with the [SLSA Gear and Equipment List](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/12129) and the [SLSA Lifesaving Equipment and Brand Guidelines](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/2526).

### Speed

- SLS IRBs must adhere to state regulations regarding speed and distance to other vessels and persons in water except for when required for lifesaving activities (patrolling, emergency response, and training).
- Adherence to the IRB operating procedures (SOPs), Powercraft Code of Conduct and the application of a risk assessment approach must always be required.

## References

- [SLSA Gear and Equipment List](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/12129)
- [SLSA Lifesaving Equipment and Brand Guidelines](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/2526)