---
section: Information Management
nav_order: 2
title: 2.2 Beachsafe
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline the single public safety information portal that should be used by all lifesaving services.

## Procedure

SLSCs and services must align and promote consistent public safety messages to all stakeholders.

[Beachsafe](http://www.beachsafe.org.au/) provides consistent public safety information and patrolled locations/times to the public in both website and smart-phone application formats. Patrol service information inputted into SurfGuard aligns directly to public information available through Beachsafe.

Beachsafe is the central reference point for all public safety information released internally and externally by SLS services. This includes:

- Media Releases/media enquiries – key safety messages should align and media releases/ enquiries should be referred to Beachsafe for more information.
- Surf Club/Service websites – safety information tabs/pages should link directly to Beachsafe.
- Public information/education collateral – should align key messages and reference Beachsafe.
- Social media posts regarding public safety information should refer to Beachsafe.
- External partners/agencies should be encouraged to link their websites, media releases and other communications regarding beach/surf safety to Beachsafe.

CAUTION: The Beachsafe app is linked to the SLSA Operations app. Any photos taken with and used in the Operations App can be displayed on the relevant Beachsafe App page of your beach.

## References

- [Beachsafe](https://beachsafe.org.au/)
- [Public Safety and Aquatic Rescue training manual, 35<sup>th</sup> Edition, Module 4 – Surf Awareness](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/8571)