---
section: Information Management
nav_order: 4
title: 2.4 Social Media
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline acceptable parameters for the use of social media regarding SLS operations.

This procedure aims to provide principles to follow when using social media. This procedure does not apply to the personal use of social media platforms by volunteers or staff where they make no reference to SLSA or related issues.

## Overview

Social media offers the opportunity for people to gather in online communities of shared interest and create, share, or consume content. As a member-based organisation, SLSSA recognises the benefits of social media as an important tool of engagement and enrichment for its members.

SLSA, its State Centres, and SLSCs have long histories and are highly respected organisations. It is important that the reputation of SLS is not damaged by anyone using social media tools inappropriately, particularly in relation to any content that might reference the organisation.

When someone clearly identifies their association with SLS, and/or discusses their involvement in the organisation in this type of forum, they are expected to behave and express themselves appropriately, and in ways that are consistent with SLSA’s stated values and policies.

## Procedure

This procedure applies to volunteers and staff or any individual representing themselves as a member of SLSA. This procedure covers all forms of social media. Social media includes, but is not limited to, such activities as:

- Maintaining a profile page on social or business networking sites,
- Content sharing include Instagram (photo sharing) and YouTube, TikTok or other video sharing platforms,
- Commenting on blogs for personal or business reasons,
- Leaving product or service reviews on retailer sites, or customer review sites,
- Taking part in online votes and polls,
- Taking part in conversations on public and private web forums (message boards), and
- Editing a Wikipedia page.

The intent of this procedure is to include anything posted online where information is shared that might affect members, colleagues, clients, sponsors or SLS as an organisation.

### Usage

For SLSSA members and staff using social media, such use:

- Must not contain, or link to, false statements, defamatory, or harassing content. This also applies to the use of illustrations or nicknames,
- Must not comment on, or publish, information that is confidential or in any way sensitive to SLSA, its affiliates, partners, or sponsors, and
- Must not bring the organisation or SLS into disrepute.

### Branding and Intellectual Property (IP)

It is important that any trademarks belonging to SLSA, State Centres or SLSCs are not used in personal social media applications, except where such use can be considered incidental (where incidental is taken to mean “happening in subordinate conjunction with something else”).

Trademarks include:

- SLSA, SLSSA, SLSC and service logos,
- The “Life of the Beach”, “Whatever it Takes” or any other associated slogans,
- Images depicting SLS volunteers, staff and/or equipment, except with the permission of those individuals, and
- Other SLSA imagery includes the red and yellow flags, the SLSA red and yellow caps or the official SLSA red and yellow patrol uniforms.

### Official Surf Life Saving (SLS) Blogs, Social Media Pages and Online Forums

When creating a new website, social networking page or forum for staff/club member use, care should be taken to ensure the appropriate person at a club/state level has given written consent to create the page or forum.

Similarly, appropriate permissions must be obtained for the use of logos or images. Images of minor children may not be replicated on any site without the written permission of the child’s parent and/or guardian.

For official SLS blogs, social pages and online forums:

- Posts must not contain, nor link to, pornographic or indecent content,
- Some hosted sites may sell the right to advertise on their sites through ‘pop up’ content which may be of a questionable nature. This type of hosted site should not be used for online forums or social pages as the nature of the ‘pop up’ content cannot be controlled,
- SLS employees must not use SLS online pages to promote personal projects, and
- All materials published or used must respect the copyright of third parties.

### Consideration Towards Others When Using Social Networking Sites

- Social networking sites allow photographs, videos, and comments to be shared with thousands of other users. SLSSA members and staff must recognise that it may not be appropriate to share photographs, videos, and comments in this way. For example, there may be an expectation that photographs taken at a private SLS event will not appear publicly on the internet. In certain situations, SLSSA members or staff could potentially breach the privacy act or inadvertently make SLSSA liable for breach of copyright.
- SLSSA members/staff should be considerate to others in such circumstances and should not post information when they have been asked not to or consent has not been sought and given. They must also remove information about another person if that person asks them to do so.
- Under no circumstance should offensive comments be made about SLSA members or staff online.

### Breach of Procedure

SLSA, SLSSA and SLSCs continually monitor online activity in relation to the organisation and its members. Detected breaches of this procedure should be reported to SLSSA.

Incident details that are posted online must be reported to the State Operations Centre 24/7 for immediate action.

If detected, a breach of this procedure may result in disciplinary action from SLSSA or SLSA. A breach of this procedure may also amount to breaches of other SLSSA and SLSA policies.

### Privilege of Information

This procedure applies to all volunteers and personnel. However, members who operate in a capacity / role where they may be privileged to information must be made especially aware of this procedure.

Employees of the Australian Lifeguard Service are included.

## References

- [SLSA Policy 6.20 – Social Media](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/943)
- [SLSA Policy 6.21 – Photography, Digital Recording and Images](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/944)