---
section: Information Management
nav_order: 5
title: 2.5 Surf and Weather Warnings
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline parameters for the dissemination of Hazardous Surf Warnings, Severe Weather Warnings and Damaging Surf warnings to internal and external stakeholders.

## Overview

Release of surf or weather warnings and operational information must be undertaken by authorised State/Club personnel only.

## Procedure

**Definition:** Any of above warnings must be deemed as any ‘release’ of a warning to the media/public other services regarding forecast high- risk surf/weather conditions.

The surf and weather warning system is administered by the State Operations Centre (SOC).

### Media

SLSSA are responsible for disseminating surf and weather warning information to the media via a Media Advisory as required. SLSCs authorised by the State Operations Centre, in consultation with the Lifesaving & Emergency Operations Manager and/or Media and Partnerships Manager, may in addition to that ‘release’ provide local/regional advice and information to the media.

SLSCs and services must not release surf and weather warnings to the media without SLSSA approval.

### Surf and Weather Warnings Protocol (General)

The following protocols are in place to best identify and provide warnings:

1. The Bureau of Meteorology forecasters identify potentially dangerous surf situations 48-24hrs prior,
2. The State Operations Centre reviews the warning requirements, and
3. The State Operations Centre releases a briefing to internal stakeholders as required.