---
section_id: Gear and Equipment
nav_order: 5
title: 5.1 Lifesaving Vehicles
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To establish a minimum standard for the management of SLS vehicles, excluding Side by Side Vehicles (SSVs).

This SOP applies to motor vehicles used specifically for lifesaving operations, including patrolling and emergency response. Guidelines for SSV are addressed in [SOP 5.2 – Side by Side Vehicles (SSVs)](#_5.2_Side-By-Side_Vehicle).

## Overview

SLS personnel required to drive as part of their patrolling duties will only be permitted to do so if they meet the following requirements:

- Driver’s license (Provisional or Full).
- Appropriate lifesaving qualifications for the patrol/response task.
- Vehicle induction specific to that vehicle, if required
- Adhere to any local SOPs relevant to the vehicle e.g. insurance

Drivers must adhere to all speed limits and all relevant laws and regulations relating to vehicles (including registrations, speed, seatbelts, parking).

Drivers of lifesaving vehicles are not exempt from any expiations.

Drivers and passengers must comply with council by-laws, Road Traffic Act and Australian Road Rules.

## Procedure

### Rescue Equipment

All vehicles assigned to patrol/response duties are recommended to carry the following lifesaving equipment during operational times:

- SLS branding/magnets,
- AED, Oxygen Resuscitation Equipment and First Aid Kit,
- Rescue Board,
- Rescue Tube and fins,
- Radio,
- Spinal Equipment and board,
- Loud Hailer/PA System,
- Jumper Leads Torch/spotlight,
- Reverse Beepers,
- Compressor,
- Snatch straps, and
- Tire pressure gauge.

Any modifications including roll bars carry racks and storage containers must adhere to manufacturer’s guidelines and be carried out in consultation with the manufacturer or dealer.

### Vehicle Branding and Surf Rescue / Lifeguard Magnets

Permanently branded lifesaving vehicles must only be operated by approved personnel for approved duties.

Surf Rescue/Lifeguard Magnets must only by utilised by approved personnel during lifesaving operations, such as Duty Officer Patrols or Emergency Response activations.

When the vehicle is being disposed, all surf lifesaving branding and equipment must be removed at the end of service.

### Amber Beacons

The use of amber beacon lights is restricted to dedicated lifesaving vehicles (not private vehicles).

Amber beacon lights must be yellow/amber in colour and meet the relevant state laws/restrictions regarding use and colours (Note: red and blue lights must not be used by lifesaving vehicles).

Flashing lights must be active on surf rescue vessels at all times when operating on the beach, whether during routine patrols or in response to emergencies. These lights serve as a critical safety measure, ensuring that the vessel remains highly visible to both the public and other lifesaving personnel.

It is the responsibility of the driver to ensure that the flashing lights are functioning properly before deployment and are activated as soon as the vessel begins operating on the beach or in an emergency situation.

Flashing lights are not to be used when operating on public roads.

Use of flashing lights does not exempt lifesaving services from any laws, regulations and by-laws (including speed/parking).

## Reference

- [Road Traffic (Light Vehicle Standards) Rules 2018 (SA)](https://www.legislation.sa.gov.au/__legislation/lz/c/r/road%20traffic%20%28light%20vehicle%20standards%29%20rules%202018/current/2018.5.auth.pdf)
- [SLSA Lifesaving Equipment and Uniform Branding Guidelines](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/2526)