---
section: Gear and Equipment
nav_order: 2
title: 5.2 Side By Side Vehicles (SSVs)
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline requirements for Side by Side (SSVs) in Surf Life Saving operations.

## Overview

Side by Side (SSV), formerly known as All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs), enable suitably qualified SLS personnel to be more mobile and capable of responding to emergencies both inside and outside of their patrolled area (on sand).

## Procedure

All SSV drivers must:

- Hold a current and proficient driver’s licence (C Class - provisional or open), and
- Be a financial member of a SLSC or employed lifeguard (on active duty).

All SSV operators must be inducted in the operation of the specific SSV by a nominated SLSC/service officer.

All SSVs are to meet SLSA gear and equipment specifications. These specifications are outlined at <https://www.sls.com.au>.

Single Seat (Quad Bikes) must not be used by members for SLS operations. Any use of ‘quads’ forfeits coverage by the association’s insurance policy for any member/club/service involved in an incident.

SSVs must abide with speed limits and all relevant laws and regulations relating to vehicles (including registration, speed, seatbelts, and parking) at all times. Speed should be minimised at every opportunity. Operators of SSVs are not exempt from any expiations.

Drivers and passengers must comply with council by-laws, Road Traffic Act and Australian Road Rules, for example seat belts. It is the driver’s responsibility to evaluate the environment to determine a safe and appropriate speed within these limits.

SSVs must minimise speed and must operate with headlights on at all times. Passengers should not exceed maximums set within the SSV owner/operator manual.

Amber lights should be hard wired into the vehicle and will operate whenever the vehicle is running. Headlights should be turned on whenever the vehicle is in motion.

SSV must also comply with all relevant vehicles standards

### Registration

All SSVs must be registered. Details can be obtained from the Lifesaving Department.

### Rescue Equipment

All on-duty SSVs should carry the following lifesaving equipment and hold the following safety items:

- Rescue board Rescue tube & fins,
- Radio,
- Loud Hailer/PA System, and
- Side doors/barriers.

No SLS vehicle is permitted to use a siren while on a road or carriageway. Sirens are strictly for beach use only.

Any modifications including roll bars, carry racks and storage containers must adhere to manufacturer’s guidelines and be carried out in consultation with the manufacturer or dealer.

### Vehicle Branding

Branding for all SLS SSVs must comply with the SLSA Lifesaving Equipment and Uniform Branding Guidelines.

## References

- [SLSA Approved Gear and Equipment List](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/12129)
- [SLSA Lifesaving Equipment and Uniform Branding Guidelines](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/2526)
- Manufacturer Operating Manual and Guidelines