---
section: Patrol Operations (Emergency)
nav_order: 7
title: 9.7 Public Order Incident / Disturbance
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To define the procedures when a public order incident or disturbance (such as an altercation) occurs at a beach during patrol hours.

## Overview

It is possible that an altercation may take place adjacent to patrol areas. Members are to ensure their own personal safety and that of any members in their charge.

## Procedure

### Notification to the State Operations Centre

The State Operations Centre (SOC) must be notified immediately whenever a Public Order Incident occurs.

### Notification to Police

Upon receiving information that a Public Order Incident is occurring the SOC will contact the police.

### Notification of other SLS Services

The SOC should notify neighbouring clubs of the situation (if applicable). Additional resources should only be sent to the incident if they are requested by police, the Patrol Captain or a Duty Officer.

### Rescues

In the event of a rescue, consideration should be given to taking any patients to an adjacent beach, or swimming them out to sea (if appropriate) to an awaiting SLS Powercraft. Normal protocols in regards to the safety of members, the patients and rescuers are paramount.

### Altercations

- If there is likely to be an altercation near patrol members all members are to leave the beach with two members remaining at a vantage point to monitor the bathing public (if it is safe to do so). Otherwise close the patrolled area by removing the flags.
- The members are to proceed to the club rooms until the disturbance has subsided. The SOC must be advised of this.
- Any radio, first aid and oxygen equipment etc. is to be removed from the beach.
- Every effort is to be taken to ensure that young or inexperienced members are protected and do not become involved (directly or indirectly).

### IRB / Rescue Vessels

If able, rescue vessels should conduct patrols from the water. The IRB must be equipped with a radio.

### Interaction with Offenders

- Members are to avoid becoming involved in any form of interaction with people causing a disturbance on the beach. It is recommended that patrolling member have no verbal communication with offenders and avoid eye contact if possible.
- If members are harassed leave the area and make sure that you stay with experienced members. Ensure the SOC has called the Police.
- Members must immediately cease all interaction and communication with any individual who is harassing or intimidating them.
- To prevent escalation and avoid potential conflict, members should promptly remove themselves from the area. If it is safe, members may discreetly record the offender from a distance using a mobile device or SLSSA CCTV to assist the police in identifying the individual(s). This footage should be promptly provided to the State Operations Centre or the Duty Officer on site. Members should remain aware that recording may provoke a reaction from the offender.

### Injuries and Rescues

If any person, including offenders, is injured or requires rescue from the water, standard first aid and rescue procedures should be administered, provided it is safe to do so.

### Post Incident

- Where physical abuse has been suffered, police should be contacted immediately.
- Complete an incident report log (take particular care to complete the narrative as thoroughly as possible and state the nature of the incident). Where the SOC has created an incident the SLSC can be provided with the incident number and append their information to the same record.
- Remain calm and follow other SLSSA procedures including incident reporting and media
- Consider requesting critical incident debriefing/peer support.

## Reference

- [SOP 15.2 – Critical Incident Debriefing](#_15.2_Critical_Incident)