---
section: Patrol Operations (Emergency)
nav_order: 9
title: 9.9 Coastal Flooding
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline how SLSSA supports the South Australian State Emergency Service (SASES) as the Control Agency during major flood incident response operations.

## Overview

In the event of a flood event, the SLSSA Flood Response Plan must be developed and followed.

All SLSSA actions must be under the control of the SLSSA Incident Commander.

## Procedure

SLSCs and services may be requested to assist during major flood events or other major incidents. The SASES is the Control Agency for flood response operations.

SLSSA may be tasked by the SASES, through the Surf Emergency Response System (13 SURF).

In case of a major flood incident response where SLSSA services have been requested by the Control Agency, a SLSSA State Coordination Team (SCT) may be established. The SLSSA SCT will have its base operation at SLSSA HQ. In addition – and depending on the severity of the incident – SLSSA Liaison Officers may be deployed to the State Emergency Centre, State Incident Management Team and/or the State Control Centre and/or other regional or local Incident Control Centres (ICCs).

Lifesaving premises may be requested as local community shelters and/or local Emergency Operation Centres (EOCs) or local Incident Control Centres (ICCs) where the location is suitable and where appropriate inter-agency communication and other facilities are available.

The SLSSA SCT will collaborate with relevant SLSCs to identify and task lifesaving services for deployment. The SLSSA SCT must be staffed by experienced members with appropriate emergency management qualifications.

## Local Response

- Under NO CIRCUMSTANCES are any independent local deployments of any kind permitted.
- Deployments will only occur following tasking through the State Operations Centre or SLSSA State SCT.
- The State Operations Centre must be notified via the Surf Emergency Response System (13 SURF) of any local deployment request.
- If during patrol hours – close patrolled area and evacuate members of the public from the area.
- Evacuate personnel and key equipment as necessary from high-risk areas following corresponding advice from the SASES.
- Evacuate members and key operational equipment to pre-determined safe location (rally point).
- Await advice/updates from the State Operations Centre/Duty Officer/SASES.
- Do not undertake any flood SAR activities unless authorised/tasked by the State Operations Centre or SLSSA State IMT.

## Reference

- [State Emergency Management Plan, Part 3: Guidelines and Frameworks, Annex A: Evacuations](https://www.dpc.sa.gov.au/responsibilities/security-emergency-and-recovery-management/state-emergency-management-plan/SEMP-Part-3-Associated-Plans.pdf)
- SLSSA Flood Response Plan