---
section: State Operations Centre (SURFCOM)
nav_order: 3
title: 12.3 Coastal Safety Camera Network (CSCN)
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---


## Purpose

To outline the capabilities of the Coastal Safety Camera Network (CSCN) function.

## Overview

The CSCN is comprised of Pan Tilt Zoom (PTZ) cameras installed at various SLSCs, enabling near 360º views of aquatic and coastal environments, which are operated by the SOC during operational times and at the request of other agencies.

Operated by the State Operations Centre (SOC) during operational times, the main objectives of the CSCN are:

- Non-continuous monitoring of coastal and aquatic environments, including, but not limited to, beach, boat ramps, and water.
- Earlier identification of persons in difficulty, incident scenes or other such event
- Potential identification of last known positions of a missing person or vessel to aid in the formulation of search and rescue plans.
- Remote monitoring of high risk incidents to improve member safety.
- Make a position impact to emergency management of coastal areas.
- Make a positive contribution to research.

## Procedure

A SLS service may request support from the SOC to monitor the CSCN to support SLS operations.

The SOC will advise the surf club if the request can be completed.

To maintain privacy standards and network security, live vision is limited to the SOC.

### Vision Requests

Requests for vision from an SLS entity or SLSC must be directed to the SOC via phone using the contact details outlined in [SOP 12.1 – State Operations Centre (SOC) – SURFCOM](12.1-state-operations-centre-soc-surfcom).

Vision requests from building security CCTV may be managed by the SLSC, however the SOC must be notified if the request relates to an SLS related incident, such as a drowning, so that the request can be recorded in the incident log.

### Surf Club / Service CCTV

Surf clubs and services are not permitted to operate CCTV for rescue purposes, to ensure the integrity of the CSCN is not undermined and SLSSA can provide a unified, central system. Building security CCTV and “surf cams” are not included in this requirement.