---
section: State Operations Centre (SURFCOM)
nav_order: 4
title: 12.4 Surf Club Emergency Response Teams (ERT)
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---


## Purpose

To outline the requirements of club/service emergency response systems.

## Overview

Due to the benefit to the community, all volunteer lifesaving services must have an emergency response (24/7 callout) capability. The emergency response capability must be delivered in the form of an Emergency Response Team (ERT),

The ERT must:

- Be comprised of at least 10 members that are 18 years or over and live or work nearby,
- Have a broad range of skills and experience, mainly focused on IRB capability,
- Have 24/7 availability between all members, with no less than 5 members being available at any one time, and
- Ensure members have suitable experience to form a team responding to emergencies in unfamiliar areas or circumstances, including Critical Incidents.

This should be achieved through a coordinated system of suitably qualified personnel with access to appropriate rescue equipment, responding within specific emergency response plans.

## Procedure

### Local Emergency Response Preparedness

Lifesaving services should have emergency response systems in place that fall in line with the Surf Life Saving Emergency Response System; namely:

- Equipment preparedness (suitable 24/7 ‘rescue ready’ equipment as outlined in following paragraphs).
- Formally established and administered callout teams.
- Local response plans.
- A formally administered personnel contact list (facilitated by the State Operations Centre).
- A contingency notification/tasking process for use during business continuity events (SMS groups/messaging services etc).

### Declining a Request for Assistance

Lifesaving services/personnel may decline a request to respond to an emergency if they feel it would create a level of unacceptable risk to do so.

Examples of reasons that a request to respond may be declined may include:

- Insufficient personnel (which may include numbers, experience and awards); Insufficient or unserviceable equipment;
- Dangerous conditions; and
- Geographical distance (outside achievable response area).
- Appropriate local emergency response planning/preparedness (equipment and procedures) will minimise the above inhibitors and maximise the ability to render assistance.

The Lifesaving Advisory Committee may request a written response from the SLSC if a request is declined or not accepted.

### Planning/Preparedness

To maximise emergency response effectiveness and personnel safety, it is recommended that clubs/ lifeguard services maintain the following ‘rescue ready’ equipment/logistical preparedness:

### Equipment

- 2x rescue tubes.
- 2x pairs of swim fins.
- 2x rescue boards.
- 1x SSV (fuelled).
- 1x AED.
- 1x oxygen resuscitation kit.
- 1x first aid kit.
- 2x radios.
- 1x emergency back-up contact book.

#### Recommended Additional Equipment

Where possible, SLSC should have an IRB ‘rescue ready’. This means the IRB should be fully equipped, maintained, and prepared for immediate deployment to respond effectively to emergency situations. Even if the SLSC does not have IRB qualified personnel on their ERT, maintaining a ‘rescue ready’ IRB allows SLSSA to deploy / react Emergency Operations Group (EOG) personnel or call upon neighbouring SLSC members for support.

In addition, in recognition of the possibility that crews may be required in reduced light, the following items should be available:

- Searchlights/torches.
- Glow Sticks.
- Loud hailer.

### Logistics

Surfguard must be utilised to maintain and administer club/service ERT contact information (updated pre-season, post-season and when otherwise changes). This will periodically be coordinated by the State Operations Centre, however whenever a SLSC is aware that a member of their ERT is unavailable for prolonged period (leave, FIFO etc,) or no longer available they should contact the SOC to have their contact information updated.

### Training/Exercises

All SLSCs/services should conduct an annual pre-season induction/briefing. This can be facilitated by the State Operations Centre as the facilitators of the Surf Emergency Response System.

All ERT members must participate in briefing, training sessions and/or local exercises as directed by SLSSA.

## Reference

- Lifesaving Service Agreement