# 5.6 Oxygen Resuscitation Equipment

## Purpose

To ensure that all personnel using oxygen resuscitation equipment are properly trained and that all equipment complies with SLSA and SLSSA standards.

## Overview

All personnel using oxygen resuscitation equipment should be appropriately trained and qualified.

All oxygen resuscitation equipment must meet SLSA and SLSSA standards.

## Procedure

All personnel operating resuscitation equipment must hold, and maintain competency for, the relevant SLSA award.

### Equipment Requirement Guidelines

An oxygen resuscitation kit should contain the following items as a minimum:

- 1x medical oxygen cylinder (2 options):
  - INHALO CD size cylinder.
  - Standard ‘C’ size medical oxygen cylinder.
    - 1x Australian Standard Regulator.
      - Three (3) settings; 8L/min, 15L/min, Off
      - Gas contents gauge.
    - Cylinder Key Wheel/Lever permanently attached with chain/rope to interior of casing.
    - 2x Spare Sealing Washers stored in a watertight container.
    - Yoke/Brass plug.
    - Coloured Chalk.
- BVM (Bag Valve Mask) and reservoir bag.
- Resuscitation masks – child and adult.
- Therapy masks – child and adult.
- Pulse oximeter.
- 2x Oxygen Tubing.
  - Soft plastic.
  - 2m in length.
  - 5mm in diameter.
- 5x Oropharyngeal Airways (sizes 1 (70mm) – 5 (110mm)).
- Pen and Notebook (to record patient details).
- 2x pairs of disposable gloves.
- Alcohol hand gel.
- Rescue sheet (space blanket).
- Manual suction unit.

Spare stocks of oxygen masks and tubing etc in First Aid Room.

### Carry Case/Bag

The carry case/bag for oxygen resuscitation equipment must be:

- Of durable material ideally water resistant, sturdy in design and able to protect contents from damage,
- Of non-corrosive material,
- Able to accommodate all the necessary equipment in a safe and orderly manner, and
- Able to safely secure an oxygen cylinder (either internally or externally) to prevent movement of the cylinder.

### Technical Servicing (External)

A qualified operator should closely check equipment at the start of patrol and as part of regular maintenance. The oxygen regulator (if using standard cylinder set-up) should be serviced annually, during non-peak times (winter months), and all consumable equipment checked for expiry.

### Cleaning

After having carried out resuscitation with an air bag resuscitator it is very important to clean all the equipment to minimise the chance of spreading disease or infections and dispose of all single use equipment.

- Single use Bag-valve-masks and reservoir bags are recommended.
- Resuscitation masks, Oxygen therapy masks, regurgitation valves, resuscitation tubing and oropharyngeal masks should be discarded after use.
- Bag-Valve-Masks, reservoir bags, resuscitation masks and therapy masks need to be clean, but not sterile. Operators should wash hands with alcohol-based hand gel +/- wear gloves prior to touching, this is applicable both when conducting pre-patrol checks and during a resuscitation.