---
section_id: 9. Patrol Operations (Emergency)
nav_order: 9
title: 9.1 Emergency Patrol Area Closure and Evacuation
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To assist Patrol Captains/Lifeguards by providing guidelines to determining their options and acting upon their decisions to close the patrolled area in a safe and efficient manner at any time other than the end of the patrol.

## Overview

SLS personnel are required to assess conditions and determine if closing the patrolled area is an appropriate option.

## Procedure

Patrol Captains/Lifeguards should consider ‘closure’, at any time that there is an unacceptable/unmanageable risk to the public or the lifesaving service is unable to effectively, and safely perform their duties.

The following are specific conditions under which ‘closure’ may be considered (this list should not be considered exclusive):

- Dangerous surf conditions:
  - Heavily dumping surf.
  - Large / unsafe surf.
  - Rips/strong currents.
  - Debris.
- Marine life:
  - Sharks.
  - Excessive stingers.
- Human hazard:
  - Uncontrollable surf craft infringements.
  - Powercraft hazards.
  - Civil disturbance.
  - Equipment in surf/swimming area (lines, netting, buoys etc).
- Environmental:
  - High pollution levels.
  - Chemical spill.
  - Oil/petrol spill.
  - Biological hazard.
- Other
  - Dangerous objects.
  - Suspicious packages.

### Emergency Patrolled Area Closure

1. Determine if water area is to be evacuated.
2. Activate the Emergency Evacuation Alarm.
3. Inform everyone of the following:
    1. Patrol area is being closed; and
    2. Reason for closure.
4. Lower and remove the red and yellow patrol flags and black (and white surf craft flags if applicable).
5. Log the beach closure through the Operations App and inform the SOC via radio on channel 3 that you are about to close the patrolled area and the reason for closing.
6. Post ‘_Swimming Not Advised’_ signs, if available, at identified beach access points and where the flagged area was located.
7. Continually monitor all areas.
8. Maintain minimum personnel, qualification and equipment requirements.
9. Maintain an active presence on the beach to advise/warn public.
10. An appropriate record should be made in the patrol log giving an outline of the incident.
11. Where required liaise with Emergency Services

### Emergency Evacuation Alarm

- **Emergency evacuation of a patrolled area:** Alarm is **sounded continuously** until everyone has exited the water.
- **All Clear/Beach Open:** Announcement is made over the loud hailer/PA system. Where an announcement system is not available a short blast of the alarm can be sounded.

### Closure Periods

The beach is to remain closed until such time as the identified hazard is controlled or no longer presents a risk. Recommended closure periods include:

- Dangerous surf conditions (as determined/appropriate).
- Shark sighting & encounters (Refer to SOP 8.5).
- Chemical/biological hazards – after confirmation from appropriate authorities that the area is safe.

### Reopening

Once it is determined that it is safe to reopen the beach, normal patrol procedures should be re-established under the direction of the Patrol Captain/Senior Lifeguard. The beach opening should be logged through the Operations App and the State Operations Centre informed via radio on channel 3.

### Reference

- [Public Safety and Aquatic Rescue training manual, 35th Edition, Module 10 – Patrol Operations, Closing the Beach](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/8571)