---
section: Work Health and Safety
nav_order: 5
title: SUNSMART
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To establish guidelines for SLSSA personnel to protect themselves from the harmful effects of sun exposure and dehydration while on duty. By implementing these precautions, SLSSA personnel can maintain their health and performance in the challenging outdoor environment.

## Overview

This procedure outlines essential measures for sun safety, including wearing UV-rated clothing, using broad-spectrum sunscreen, and staying hydrated during patrols. It emphasises the importance of regularly checking for skin changes and encourages the use of shaded areas and proper hydration strategies to prevent dehydration and heat-related illnesses.

This Procedure serves as a practical guide to understanding and managing the risks associated with UVR and heat within your club. While it provides essential information and recommended practices, it is not a substitute for the obligations and responsibilities that the Person Conducting a Business or Undertaking (PCBU) must uphold under the Work Health and Safety (WHS) Act. Clubs must ensure compliance with all legal requirements, and this guide should be used to complement, not replace, the mandatory duties outlined in the legislation.

## Procedure

SLSSA personnel are required to follow necessary precautions to protect themselves from the effects of direct exposure to sun light and UV radiation. SLS personnel are to limit sun exposure by:

- Wearing UV rated clothing such as patrol uniform (long sleeve shirt, rash vest, SLSA issue shorts),
- Applying broad spectrum SPF 50 or SPF 50+ water resistant sunscreen regularly,
- Wearing a SLSA approved cap, bucket or wide brimmed hat,
- Avoiding the sun by staying in the shade wherever possible, particularly between 10 am and 3 pm e.g. use of a patrol tent, and
- Wearing UV protective sunglasses.

It is recommended that surf SLS personnel check their skin regularly for suspicious spots and address any concerns with a doctor. Please refer to the Beachsafe App or Bureau of Meteorology for the current sun safety rating on any given day.

### Dehydration

Dehydration of as little as 2% loss of body weight results in impaired physiological responses and performance.  As dehydration can cause fatigue and loss of concentration, impacting on performance of lifesaving activities, it is important to take in sufficient fluids while on duty.

Current Government Health guidelines indicate that the body's hydration needs vary widely according to environmental conditions, physical activity and individual metabolism.  While there is no single level of water intake that would ensure adequate hydration and optimal health for all ages and genders, which covers all environmental conditions, recommended daily water intake is shown in the below table:

| **Age** | **Gender** | **Adequate Intake** |     |
| --- | --- | --- |     | --- |
| **Total Water** | **Fluids** |
| 9 – 13 years | Male | 2.2 Litres / Day | 1.6 Litres / Day - (>6 cups) |
| Female | 1.9 Litres / Day | 1.4 Litres / Day - (5-6 cups) |
| 14 – 18 years | Male | 2.7 Litres / Day | 1.9 Litres / Day - (7-8 cups) |
| Female | 2.2 Litres / Day | 1.6 Litres / Day - (>6 cups) |
| 18 + Years | Male | 3.4 Litres / Day | 2.6 Litres / Day - (>10 cups) |
| Female | 2.8 Litres / Day | 2.1 Litres / Day - (>8 cups) |

To minimise the effects of dehydration, which in extreme cases may lead to heat exhaustion and heat stroke, SLS personnel must continually hydrate and reapply sunscreen and should rotate through various positions on the beach throughout the patrol.

Sun shelters (e.g. patrol tents) and other shaded areas should be used where possible.

Suitable quantities of water and/or rehydration/electrolyte mixture should be carried while patrolling on powercraft. It is prudent to carry extra to ensure your safety in the event of a breakdown, prolonged SAR operation, etc. UV rated patrol SLSA issue SLSA approved cap, bucket or wide brimmed hat.

## References

- [Work Health and Safety Act 2012](https://www.legislation.sa.gov.au/LZ/C/A/WORK%20HEALTH%20AND%20SAFETY%20ACT%202012.aspx)
- [Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012](https://www.legislation.sa.gov.au/lz?path=%2Fc%2Fr%2Fwork%20health%20and%20safety%20regulations%202012)
- [Guidelines for Safer Surf Clubs v4 May 2020, Chapter 3 – Common Hazards in the Surf Club Environment](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/3373)