---
section: Patrol Operations (Emergency)
nav_order: 10
title: 9.10 Tsunami Warning
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline how SLSSA supports the South Australian State Emergency Service (SASES) during Tsunami response operations on the SA coastline.

## Overview

In the event of a Tsunami, SLSSA must assist as required by the State Coordinator or Control Agency.

## Importance of Effective Tsunami Response

SLSSA may be requested to assist with Tsunami events, including planning and response arrangements.

While Tsunamis are unlikely on the SA coast compared to interstate lifesaving services, the Tsunami threat is of specific importance to SLSSA and coastal lifeguard services for the following reasons:

1. The “coastal” location of lifesaving activities and facilities place SLSSA and lifesaving personnel/ facilities in a high-risk area in a Tsunami event.
2. As the services are most active on the beach and in-shore aquatic areas, lifesavers and lifeguards are best situated, equipped and trained to warn beach goers of a potential hazard and recommend evacuation/action, based on advice/instruction of the SES.
3. Lifesavers and lifeguards are best situated to notify the SES when unusual ocean behaviour indicative of a Tsunami is observed, or a Tsunami has occurred for which there has been no prior warning.
4. Lifesavers and lifeguards are equipped and trained to support SA Police in search and rescue activities post Tsunami.
5. As an expert provider of aquatic safety training to the public SLSSA is able to assist the SASES in educating the public regarding best practice response to a Tsunami event.

## Procedure

SLSCs and services may be requested to assist during a Tsunami event or other major incidents. The SASES is the Control Agency for flood response operations (including Tsunami).

SLSSA may be tasked by the SASES, through the Surf Emergency Response System (13 SURF).

In case of a tsunami incident response where SLSSA services have been requested by the Control Agency, a SLSSA State Coordination Team (SCT) may be established. The SLSSA SCT will have its base operation at SLSSA HQ. In addition – and depending on the severity of the incident – SLSSA Liaison Officers may be deployed to the State Emergency Centre, State Incident Management Team and/or the State Control Centre and/or other regional or local Incident Control Centres (ICCs).

In the unlikely event of a tsunami, SLSC should consider:

### Immediate Response Coordination

- Upon notification by the State Coordinator or Control Agency, SLSSA and its SLSC should activate their local emergency response protocols.
- SLSSA will ensure clear communication channels with SASES, and other relevant authorities, are established and maintained.

### Public Warning and Evacuation

- SLSC are to be prepared to utilise beach patrols and SLSC facilities to monitor ocean conditions and look for signs of unusual wave behaviour.
- If unusual ocean behaviour indicative of a tsunami is observed or a tsunami warning is issued, promptly notify SASES (via SOC) and initiate public warnings through appropriate channels (e.g., beach announcements, signage, social media).
- Where safe to do so, SLSC should guide beachgoers to evacuate inland or to higher ground as per State Government / SASES recommendations.

### Collaboration with Authorities

- SLSC are to be prepared to support SASES in coordinating evacuation efforts and providing real-time updates on beach conditions and public safety.
- SLSC should assist SA Police in search and rescue operations as necessary post-tsunami. If requested to directly by SA Police, SLSC are to ensure that the SOC has been advised.

### Education and Training

- SLSC should be prepared to conduct training sessions for members to ensure they are equipped to respond effectively during tsunami events.

### Documentation and Reporting

- Maintain detailed records of actions taken during the tsunami event, including communications, warnings issued, and assistance provided to authorities.
- Collaborate with SASES in debrief sessions to evaluate response effectiveness and identify areas for improvement.

By adhering to these procedures and leveraging their expertise, SLSSA and SLSC can play a vital role in safeguarding public safety during the unlikely event of tsunami along the South Australian coastline.

## References

- [State Emergency Management Plan, Part 3: Guidelines and Frameworks, Annex A: Evacuations](https://www.dpc.sa.gov.au/responsibilities/security-emergency-and-recovery-management/state-emergency-management-plan/SEMP-Part-3-Associated-Plans.pdf)
- [Public Safety and Aquatic Rescue training manual, 35<sup>th</sup> Edition, Module 4 – Surf Awareness, Tsunamis](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/8571)
- [Public Safety and Aquatic Rescue training manual, 35th Edition, Module 10 – Patrol Operations, Working with other emergency services](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/8571)