---
section: 4 Licences
nav_order: 4
title: 4.4 Public Vessel Operations Close to Flagged Areas
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

The purpose of this procedure is to establish clear guidelines for the use of public marine vessels by members of the public in areas patrolled by SLSSA.

This procedure aims to ensure the safety of all individuals in and around patrolled waters by providing protocols that minimise risks, enhance coordination with volunteer lifesavers, and promote responsible vessel operation near designated swimming and recreational zones.

## Overview

This procedure provides SLS personnel with the necessary procedures for engaging with public vessels to maintain safety in patrolled areas, including initial assessment, communication of requirements, and enforcement actions when necessary.

### SA Government Regulations – Public (Non SLS Vessels)

Because of the likely higher numbers of people in these waters, the South Australian boating safety handbook states that all vessels, including PWC and sailing craft, should avoid approaching within 200 m of the shore _within_ the flagged zone.

The Boating Regulations also direct that a 4-knot speed limit applies within 50m of swimmers or other people in the water at all times.

## Procedure

Marine vessels could pose a hazard due to size, weight and speed of the vessel when operating in close proximity to swimmers and non-powered craft. SLS personnel should adopt the following approach when engaging with public vessels within a patrol area:

**Initial Engagement**

- **Assess**: When SLS personnel identifies a vessel operating near swimmers or in a patrolled area, they should immediately assess the situation for any imminent danger to the swimmers or vessel operators.
- **Safe Approach**: SLS personnel should approach the vessel in a manner that ensures their own safety and that of the vessel operators and swimmers. If possible, approach the vessel on a powered rescue craft (e.g., IRB) or from the shore using hand signals.
- **Establish Contact**: Politely gain the attention of the vessel operators. If they are onshore, approach them directly. If they are on the water, use clear and calm hand signals or a loudhailer to communicate.

**Communication of Requirements**

- **Inform**: Clearly inform the vessel operators of the relevant safety regulations and the specific requirements for operating near swimmers.
- **Provide Rationale**: Explain the reasons for these requirements, emphasising the importance of swimmer safety and the role of SLS personnel in preventing accidents and ensuring a safe environment for all beachgoers.

**Escalation Actions**

- **Escalation**: If the vessel operators do not comply after being informed or warned, SLS personnel should escalate the matter by contacting the State Operations Centre (SOC). The SOC will make an assessment on which reporting actions are required, based on the SOC Standard Operating Procedures.
- **Documentation**: Report the interaction to the SOC (via radio), noting the vessel’s registration number, the nature of the violation, the actions taken, and any response from the operators. If a registration number is not available, it is highly likely that the authorities will be able to take any enforcement action. As such, try to obtain as much information on the vessel as possible.
- **Request Assistance**: If the situation escalates or if multiple vessels are involved, request additional resources via the SOC. The SOC will can also contact authorities to manage the situation safely .