# 7.1 Radio Communications

## Purpose

To outline SLSC/service radio communications requirements for all lifesaving, training and sport operations.

## Overview

All SLS services must meet the SLSSA radio/communication requirements when undertaking lifesaving, training or sport operations, including:

- SLSSA approved radio equipment (types/models),
- SLSSA approved radio frequencies (channels), and
- Coordinating though the State Operations Centre (SOC) (for lifesaving operations).

## SLSSA Coastal Radio Network

All SLSCs and services must utilise and operate within the SLSSA Coastal Radio Network. No lifesaving service will undertake operations on alternative networks or establish their own alternative radio communications networks unless authorised by the State Officer (Communications).

Only SLSSA approved radio frequencies and channel allocations will be programmed into SLS radios. No unapproved frequencies or frequency changes are permitted without the approval of SLSSA. Programming of SLSC and service radios must only be undertaken by SLSSA.

SLS radio frequencies are licensed to and managed by SLSSA. No SLSC or service will apply for, or implement, frequencies through the ACMA for operations outside of the SLSSA frequency plan.

Only approved SLS club/service officers/personnel (who are currently SLS/ALS members/staff) will utilise and operate lifesaving radio equipment and monitor lifesaving frequencies. External partner agencies/stakeholders must require written permission to hold, use or monitor SLSSA radio frequencies.

## Equipment

All SLS radios must be listed in the SLSSA Coastal Radio Network Approved Equipment List and meet the requirements outlined in [SOP 7.2 – Equipment Specifications](#_7.2_Radio_Equipment).

All SLS radios must be serviced regularly by a licensed and SLSSA endorsed technician/service agent. Only SLSSA approved, licensed agents/service technicians may service or program SLS radios.

## State Operations Centre (SOC) / SurfCom

All SLSCs and services must utilise the State Operations Centre (SOC) (call sign SurfCom) for all general operations, coordination and incident management. This directive ensures a unified and efficient approach to managing beach safety and lifesaving operations.

No SLSC or service is permitted to operate without the direct coordination and oversight of the State Operations Centre (SOC) to ensure that all lifesaving activities are conducted in a manner that adheres to the highest standards of safety, coordination, and compliance.

No SLSC or service will implement their own SOC/SurfCom type entity, or similar, without the authorisation of the State Officer (Communications), except for training as outlined in [SOP 7.9 – Radio Training](#_7.9_Radio_Training).

## Availability

All SLSCs and services must be contactable via radio if conducting lifesaving operations where network coverage exists.