# 7.2 Radio Equipment Specifications

## Purpose

To outline minimum radio specifications for SLS radios used in SA.

## Overview

Only SLSSA approved radio makes or models detailed in the SLSSA Coastal Radio Network Approved Equipment List are to be utilised for lifesaving, training and sport operations to ensure optimal working ability within the SLSSA Coastal Radio Network.

Radios for lifesaving operations must be purchased only from SLSSA approved suppliers/dealers via the Lifesaving Portal at [www.surflifesavingsa.com.au/portal](http://www.surflifesavingsa.com.au/portal).

SLSCs and services must not contact suppliers for quotes directly. Requests for quotes must be made via the Lifesaving Portal.

Only SLSSA approved radio service agents are be authorised to service or program SLS radios.

SLS radios must only have the SLSSA schedule of radio frequencies/channels programmed into them, unless approved by the State Officer (Communications).

No person will provide SLSSA frequencies to other parties, unless authorised by the State Officer (Communications).

No other radios other than SLS radios are to hold SLSSA frequencies without SLSSA approval in writing from both parties.

External (non SLS) services with authorisation to hold SLS frequencies must reapply to SLSSA annually.

SLS clubs/services must service all radio equipment regularly, including frequency/channel alignment, as outlined in [SOP 7.3 – Radio Equipment Maintenance and Servicing](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/12129).

Programming, including special functions, will be at the direction of the State Officer (Communications).

No SLSC will operate any other radio, including VHF Marine and 27Mhz radio, without authorisation from the State Officer (Communications).

## Definitions

- **Base/Mobile –** Fixed radio unit usually located in towers, SLSCs or vehicles.
- **Portable/Handheld –** Radio units used by individuals.
- **Lifesaving Operations –** Patrolling, emergency response, training, events and carnivals.