---
section_id: 3 Lifesaving Standards
nav_order: 3
title: 3.1 Lifesaving Service Agreements
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

Lifesaving Service Agreements and Lifeguard Service Contracts are documents that specify the operations for a particular beach/service or area to which a lifesaving service operates.

## Overview

SLSSA encourages all SLSCs and services to apply a high focus on preventative methods and actions to enable the reduction of injury and death on SA beaches.

The purpose of Lifesaving Service Agreements is to set-out the levels of service pertaining to SLSCs. The Agreement should be read in conjunction with SLSSA SOPs.

During the term of the agreement, any changes to this document must be endorsed by the SLSSA Lifesaving & Emergency Operations Manager or Chair of the Lifesaving Advisory Committee.

## Lifesaving Service Agreements

Lifesaving Service Agreements (LSAs) between SLSSA and SLSCs have been developed utilising a risk-based approach to allow all levels of the organisation to plan and implement the most appropriate types and number of lifesaving frontline services required for their relevant area(s), taking into account the following risk elements:

- History and Type of incidents,
- Beach visitation numbers,
- Prevalent recreational activities,
- Weather and climate conditions,
- Surf conditions i.e. high surf,
- Existing hazards i.e. rock platforms, and
- State and Local Government/Council requirements.

The Lifesaving Service Agreements are required in accordance with SLSSA By-Laws Section 6. The SLSSA Constitution and By-Laws are binding on all members of Surf Life Saving SA.

These Agreements comprise part of the rules framework of SLSSA, and all SLSCs are obliged to execute this agreement.

SLSCs that do not comply with the agreement will have contravened SLSSA By-Laws. The agreement is subject to, and will be interpreted in accordance with, the SLSSA Constitution and By-Laws.

SLSCs whose Constitution do not comply with the relevant State Constitution and vary from the above, should take the necessary steps to ensure that their constitution does comply.

A SLSC Lifesaving Service Agreement must be negotiated and endorsed by the respective Club President, Club Captain, LAC Chair, Lifesaving & Emergency Operations Manager and SLSSA prior to the commencement of each agreement period.

All Lifesaving Service Agreements must be sent to SLSSA and received no later than 7 days prior to the start of the patrol season of each year (agreements may be signed for a period beyond 1 year).

The Lifesaving Advisory Committee reserves the right to make alterations to minimum service requirements based on special and/or unforeseen circumstances, provided such is based on evidence or mandated requirements (e.g. change in legislation).

In addition to LSAs, SLSCs may also have agreements in place with their LGAs/councils. If an LGA/council wish to negotiate an agreement with SLSCs, please notify SLSSA. It is strongly advised that legal advice be sought prior to any agreement being entered into with a LGA or other external stakeholder.

## Lifeguard Service Contracts

Lifeguard contracts are a commercial-in-confidence document between the Contract Manager and SLSSA. The Lifesaving Services Coordinator, or their proxy, manages all Lifeguard Contracts and its contents on behalf of the organisation.

All lifeguard services must have a lifeguard contract or Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for the provision of services. Lifeguard contracts are negotiated and agreed upon by the delegated staff member and the Chief Executive Officer.

All lifeguards and lifeguard supervisors must operate within the parameters of the relevant lifeguard contracts at all times.

## Service Area Definitions

### Primary Patrolling Area

- ‘Beach segment’: sandbar, and adjacent inshore holes and rip currents (approx. 400m).
- Highest level of service provision; constant supervision.
- Use of red and yellow flags.
- Proactive engagement with beach and water users, and focus on preventative actions e.g. reduce the likelihood and severity of incidents.
- Identify persons in difficulty and respond immediately using a rescue tube or rescue board; response using an inflatable rescue boat or rescue watercraft as required.

### Secondary Patrolling Area

- Additional ‘segments’ either side of the ‘Primary Patrolling Area’ (approximately 200-300m either side). These ‘segments’ may include beach, rock shelf, headlands etc.
- Moderate level of service provision; regular ‘surveillance’.
- Roving surveillance using an all-terrain vehicle, inflatable rescue boat, and/or rescue watercraft e.g. once every 30-60 minutes.
- Proactive engagement with beach and water users, and a focus on preventative actions during roving surveillance.
- Identification and response using an all-terrain vehicle and rescue tube and/or rescue board, or an inflatable rescue boat or rescue watercraft.

### Emergency Response Area

- Lowest level of service; response to incidents outside Primary and Secondary Patrolling Areas.
- Areas north and south / east and west that the service can respond to immediately to potentially affect a successful rescue e.g. within 10 minutes via SSV and/or IRB.
- Response alongside other services is likely in these areas.
- Services could be tasked beyond these areas e.g. more than 10 minutes, but a positive outcome may be less likely.
- Surf clubs should identify these areas within their local Standard Operating Procedures.

## Scope

Lifesaving Service Agreements must be completed for the following services:

- Lifeguards,
- SLSCs, and
- Other applicable services as directed by the Lifesaving Advisory Committee

## LSA Dispute Process

If there is a dispute (i.e. no agreement) between the SLSC and SLSSA that cannot be rectified/resolved during the normal negotiation process, a dispute resolution process can be pursued. The Lifesaving Advisory Committee will establish the dispute resolution process.

The dispute resolution process is separate to the granting of exemptions for SLSCs.

Where a new signed agreement is not achieved by the start of the patrol season, the Lifesaving Service Agreement from the previous year will continue until a new Lifesaving Service Agreement is signed and endorsed by all parties.

## Special Exemption Requests

In special circumstances SLSCs/services may request consideration of a special exemption to specified requirements within a Lifesaving Service Agreement. Such a request must be made in writing to the Lifesaving and Emergency Operations Manager and LAC Chair and have endorsement of the Club President and Club Captain. A special exemption request must be supported by clear evidence/data/need and include a specific plan and timeline to re-establish full capacity.

Note: Where no special exemption has been granted and a SLSC falls below its minimum LSA requirements, the SLSSA By-laws will apply.

In the event of a Club failing, for any reason, to efficiently patrol its area or committing any breach of the patrol requirements, it shall be reported to the Lifesaving and Emergency Operations Manager. If, in their opinion, the matter is serious, they shall lay the appropriate charge and refer the matter to the Board who can exercise their powers under the SLSSA Constitution or National Policy to review and determine the matter.

_SLSA By-Laws Section 6_

## Reference

Lifesaving Service Agreement