---
section: 3 Lifesaving Standards
nav_order: 2
title: 3.2 Lifesaving Service Requirements (Minimum)
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline the lifesaving service requirements of SLSSA.

## Overview

### Lifesaving Regulations

Each SLSC is responsible for patrolling the beach(es) or water areas in accordance with their Lifesaving Service Agreement/contract, the SLSSA SOPs and SLSA Policies.

Local operations may set minimum requirements that apply to their local area of operations over and above State and National minimum requirements. No SLS service may set minimum requirements beneath the minimums set by State and National bodies (unless endorsed by the Lifesaving Advisory Committee).

## Procedure

### Minimum Lifesaving Season – Surf Life Saving Clubs

SLSSA affiliated SLSCs must provide lifesaving services on Saturdays, Sundays and Public Holidays on the dates outlined in the SLSC’s Lifesaving Service Agreement.

SLSCs are encouraged to operate over and above the minimum requirements of the official patrol season where local conditions and visitations demand and should confirm the best means to achieve this within their Lifesaving Services Agreement. Where relevant, this should be done in consultation with local Lifeguard services.

Any alterations to a lesser minimum patrol season must be authorised by the Lifesaving Advisory Committee. Extensions beyond the minimum patrol season must be authorised by the Lifesaving Advisory Committee.

### Minimum Lifesaving Season – Lifeguard Services

Lifeguard services seasons are stipulated with each individual contract schedule. These vary from contract to contract, however all effort is made to ensure that times patrolled by volunteer lifesavers are consistent with that of lifeguard services.

Any alterations to the lifeguard contracted time must be dually authorised by SLSSA and the Council, or other client, in writing (unless in an emergency).

### SLS Service Operational Times

Minimum lifesaving service times are determined by both the local level (i.e. SLSCs and councils) in conjunction with SLSSA, taking into consideration local hazards/risks/beach patronage/recreational activities and prevailing environmental conditions. The specific times of patrolling for each season must be listed in the Lifesaving Service Agreement. Any reductions to patrol times set within the Lifesaving Service Agreement must be approved by the Lifesaving Advisory Committee.

Where a SLSC has a Lifesaving Service Shortage, refer to [SOP 3.5 – Personnel and Equipment Shortages](#_3.5_Personnel_and).

Note: It is pertinent that minimum start and finish times are applied as consistently as possible to all lifesaving services across areas, as it enables these to be advertised to the public and maximise public safety/communication around supervised swimming locations/times.

### SLS Personnel/Qualifications

All SLSC patrols must have on-duty, proficient personnel with the qualifications outlined in their Lifesaving Service Agreement.

SLSCs may increase personnel numbers and qualification requirements above the SLSSA minimums on the day of any given patrol.

### Patrol Captain Requirements

The Patrol Captain is the principle leader of their patrol’s lifesaving functions on the beach. At the operational level, the major function of the Patrol Captain is to ensure effective beach management and rescue capabilities are established and maintained during their rostered watch.

The Patrol Captain is the designated forward commander of an incident that occurs within their patrolling area during patrolling times. The Patrol Captain (or acting Patrol Captain when they are unavailable) must hold a Bronze Medallion/Certificate II in Public Safety (Aquatic Rescue).

SLSCs are strongly encouraged to ensure their Patrol Captains hold the Silver Medallion Patrol Captain or Silver Medallion Beach Management awards.

## Reference

Lifesaving Service Agreement