---
section_id: 12 State Operations Centre (SOC) – SURFCOM
nav_order: 12
title: 12.1 State Operations Centre (SOC) – SURFCOM
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To provide an overview of State Operations Centre (SOC) – callsign SurfCom – operations within SLSSA.

## Overview

SLSSA provides the following guidelines and requirements to ensure the ongoing effectiveness of the State Operations Centre in the support of lifesaving operations.

## Procedure

### Scope of Operation – Days/Hours

The State Operations Centre (SOC) function operates 365 days a year, either in a on operational or in a remote capacity for activations and other events.

Seasonal hours may vary, however minimum operating hours are 09:00hrs – 18:00hrs on Saturday, Sunday and Public Holidays during the patrol season.

Where patrols extend hours due to conditions such as beach visitation or developing incident, the SOC will extend its closure time.

No SLS patrol or service should operate a scheduled patrol without the support of the SOC. At least 6 hours notice must be given to the SOC, via phone to 8354 6924 (24/7).

### Scope of Operation – After Hours Capacity

The SOC retains the capacity to be activated after-hours and out-of-season for specific events and emergency incidents.

The SOC maintains the [Surf Emergency Response System (SERS)](#_12.2_Surf_Emergency), also known as 13 SURF, function and will direct services whether after hours capacity must use phone or radio.

## Contact Details

These contact details **must not** be provided external to SLS without permission from the State Operations Centre. [SOP 2.3 – Contact Information for Members of the Public](#_2.3_Contact_Information) provides information for signage etc.

| **Function** |     | **Contact Details** |
| --- |     | --- | --- |
| **Emergency** | Report incident, member injury or request lifesaving service support. | 13 SURF (13 7873) |
| **General (non-emergency)** | General information, Operations App and Coastal Radio Network support, permission to carry out training activities and general lifesaving support. | (08) 8354 6924 |
| **Incident Photos/Videos SMS Line** | SMS number to send incident photos/videos to the SOC to be added to incident log | 0408 949 071 |
| **Email Address** | State Operations Centre | [soc@surlifesavingsa.com.au](mailto:soc@surlifesavingsa.com.au) |
| SOC Manager | [soc.manager@surflifesavingsa.com.au](mailto:soc.manager@surflifesavingsa.com.au) |
| **Member Critical Incident Support Line** | Member welfare line for Employee Assistance (EAP) referrals | (08) 8354 6999 |