---
section: Licences
nav_order: 7
title: 4.7 Surf Rescue Vessels
layout: lesson-content
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

The purpose of this procedure is to establish the obligations and operational requirements for SLSSA surf rescue vessels.

## Overview

This procedure provides a framework for the operation and management of SLSSA surf rescue vessels. These vessels, which include Inflatable Rescue Boats (IRB), Jet Rescue Boats (JRB), and Rescue Water Craft (RWC), play a critical role in both patrol and emergency response operations.

## Procedure

A surf rescue vessel is defined as a SLSSA registered vessel that operates both short and long range in both surveillance and response operations.

### Types of SLS Surf Rescue Vessels

- Inflatable Rescue Boat (IRB).
- Jet Rescue Boat (JRB).
- Rescue Water Craft (RWC).

### Scope of Operations – Patrol Season / Patrol Hours

An SLSC operated surf rescue vessel must perform normal rostered patrols on Saturdays, Sundays and Public Holidays within the patrolling season as outlined in the Lifesaving Service Agreement, including Hot Weather requirements.

State operated surf rescue vessels are required to conduct patrols according to the schedules and areas assigned by their designated Coordinator. These patrols are to be carried out in accordance with operational guidelines and with a focus on maintaining safety and readiness.

The State Operations Centre (SOC) must monitor all lifesaving activities of surf rescue vessels, ensuring continuous communication, coordination, and support throughout the duration of their patrols. This oversight is crucial for facilitating rapid response to incidents, ensuring adherence to patrol protocols, and providing assistance as needed to safeguard both the public and rescue personnel.

### Scope of Operations – Out of Season / After Hours

Surf rescue vessels must be on call 24/7, 365 days a year and should be able to deploy on the water within the shortest operational time possible, adhering to any operational limitations.

## References

- Lifesaving Service Agreement
- [SOP 10.1 – Reduced Visibility Operations](#_10.1_Reduced_Visibility)