# 3.8 Gear and Equipment Inspections

## Purpose

To outline the annual gear and equipment inspection program and identify the programs requirements, processes, and benefits for all SLSCs and services.

The annual gear and equipment inspection program ensures all SLSCs have sufficient functional equipment to meet Lifesaving Service Agreement requirements. The program also promotes the management, maintenance and quality of all patrolling gear and equipment, creating a safer working environment for members and enhances rescue capabilities.

## Overview

All SLS services are required to ensure they maintain a safe environment and meet their responsibilities in regard to gear and equipment inspections.

## Procedure

A circular will be issued by SLSSA annually and forwarded to SLSCs outlining the key dates and actions.

Each year all SLS equipment must be inspected prior to the commencement of the patrol season by the SLSCs, in accordance with the annual Gear and Equipment Inspection program.

All equipment inspections must be recorded using the Operations App.

SLSCs and services must ensure gear and equipment information is regularly updated in Surfguard and reviewed/updated prior to commencement of gear and equipment inspections. SLSCs should incorporate the gear and equipment inspections process into the general management system for clubs repairs and maintenance programs throughout the season.

Gear and equipment that has not passed inspection must be removed from service until it is repaired to an approved status.

## References

- [SLSA Guideline for Safer Surf Clubs](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/3373)
- Annual Gear & Equipment Circular