---
# section_id: 10 Reduced Visibility Operations
nav_order: 10
title: 10.1 Reduced Visibility Operations
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline guidelines and procedures for SLSSA activities during periods of reduced visibility

## Definitions

Reduced visibility is when SLSSA personnel cannot clearly see a distance of 100m ahead due to unfavourable conditions, such as failing light, sun glare, rain and/or fog.

Sunset is defined as the disappearance of the Sun below the horizon of the Earth.

Civil twilight is the period when the sky is light, even though the sun is just below the horizon. It occurs twice daily: in the morning before the sun rises (dawn) and in the evening after the sun sets (dusk). During this time, there is enough natural light to see clearly without artificial lighting. For SLSSA purposes, civil twilight concludes 15 minutes after sunset.

## Overview

In conditions of reduced visibility, it becomes more difficult to accurately assess hazards, locate individuals in distress, and navigate safely. This can lead to delayed response times, decreased effectiveness of rescue efforts, and a higher likelihood of accidents or injuries to both the public and lifesaving personnel. As such, SLSSA activities / operations should not occur during periods of reduced visibility unless appropriate mitigations have been instigated or personnel have received specialist training.

To avoid members operating in poor visibility, unless responding to an emergency situation at the direction of a Duty Officer or the State Operations Centre, SLSCs must ensure that no members are conducting water-based activities 45 minutes before sunset.

When visibility changes due to adverse weather conditions, the Patrol Captain must adjust patrol activities to prioritise member safety, making the necessary modifications to operations as needed.

Any reduced visibility operations must be delivered by pre-identified, trained and resourced teams. SLSCs are not permitted to undertake any water activities in low light conditions.

The Rostered Duty Officer, Jet Rescue Boat (JRB) Service, Remotely Piloted Air System Service (RPAS) Service, State Operations Centre (SOC) are the only services endorsed to be involved in command, coordination and operation of water based activities in low light conditions.

## Procedure

### Introduction

SLSSA members should be clear of the water 45 minutes prior to sunset.

SLSSA personnel and assets may be tasked to perform search/rescue operations during reduced visibility conditions. This Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) sets out to offer guidelines and procedures to be followed when responding to emergency response operations during reduced visibility conditions.

On-water Night Operations are to only be conducted in surf conditions in the lead up to sunset and up to 1 hour (60 minutes) following sunset.

Any vessel – powered and unpowered – operating on the water after sunset must comply with the requirements for displaying lights as detailed in the [South Australian Recreational Boating Safety Handbook](https://www.marinesafety.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1106376/SA-Recreational-Boating-Safety-Handbook-August-2022.pdf).

Low-light/night IRB operations can be conducted on enclosed (flat water) at any time, following an appropriate risk assessment, approval granted via the State Operations Centre and sufficient navigation/safety equipment requirements are available.

Jet Rescue Boats are the only water asset equipped, trained and appropriate for night operations. The Duty Officer Team, State Operations Centre and RPAS Service are the land based services, in addition to SLSC land based responders.

### Land

Land based searches between sunset and sunrise (night operations) are to be conducted under the instruction and direction of the appropriate combat agency i.e. Police, provided that it is safe to do so, and that Lifesaving Services have the correct safety and protective equipment for the given task.

Members should hold the Silver Medallion Aquatic Rescue (SMAR) award where possible.

## Reference

- [South Australian Recreational Boating Safety Handbook](https://www.marinesafety.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1106376/SA-Recreational-Boating-Safety-Handbook-August-2022.pdf)