---
section: Communications
nav_order: 9
title: 7.9 Radio Training
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline club/service radio communications requirements for training.

## Overview

SLSCs and services must ensure they use the SLSSA Coastal Radio Network for training in a way that does not confuse the training session with a real situation.

## Procedure

All SLSCs and services must ensure the following when they are undertaking training:

- The State Operations Centre (SOC) must be advised of any training that could be confused with a real situation at least 7 days before the training commences. The SOC does not usually need to be notified of training sessions that could not be confused with a real situation.
- Training must occur on simplex channels where possible.
- Training which involves search and rescue or incident related scenarios must not occur on repeater channels without permission from the State Operations Centre, which may be obtained by calling 8354 6924 (24/7).
- Call sign SURFCOM must not be used on repeater channels for training without permission from the State Operations Centre.
- Priority must be given to general lifesaving operations.
- Training must cease if directed to by the State Operations Centre.

### Message

All SLSCs and services must provide a message to all users on the channel being used.

**Start:** All Stations, this is &lt;call sign&gt;. We are undertaking training on this channel until &lt;time&gt; in &lt;area&gt;

**End:** All Stations, this is &lt;call sign&gt;. We have completed training on this channel.

SLSCs and services undertaking training which involves search and rescue or incident related scenarios which has been approved by the State Operations Centre, must notify the SOC by phone at the start and end of the training.

### No Duff

In the event of a genuine emergency, NO DUFF must be communicated on the channel in use for training, followed by a description of the emergency.

In the event of a NO DUFF situation being declared, all training must cease until the emergency has ended.