# 8.2 Opening of Patrol (Start of Patrol)

## Purpose

To outline the key required actions when opening a patrolled area.

## Overview

SLS personnel in most areas are required to determine the safety of the selected patrol area and the most appropriate method and efficient deployment of equipment and personnel in addition to any specific actions that may have to be taken to ensure public safety.

## Procedure

### Establishing a Flagged Area

The flagged area should be located in the safest area for swimming and should be opened as wide as possible where conditions, activities and resources allow.

Patrol flags and rescue equipment must be positioned as close to the water’s edge as possible.

The flags and rescue equipment must be moved with the rise and fall of the tide to keep them at the waters edge.

It should be noted that the decision to not erect a flagged area does not mean that the beach is closed for other participants e.g. Surfers or Nippers. Prior to any SLS activities commencing on a closed beach, an appropriate documented risk assessment must be completed by SLS personnel and in consultation with Lifeguards where appropriate to the respective beach.

In areas where a flagged area is established the following factors should be considered:

#### General

- Size and distance of area to be patrolled.
- Number of patrons (in attendance and anticipated) .
- Skill level(s) of patrons.
- Type of activities.
- Recreational equipment in use (inflatables, etc).
- Potential hazards (i.e. Rocks, sudden drop off, etc).
- The number of personnel on duty.
- The type and amount of equipment available.
- Facilities available to the lifesaving services.
- Safety and emergency support operations.
- Communications systems (access to support/emergency services).
- Consideration given to the other beach users (i.e. Surfers)

#### Beach/Surf

- Beach type.
- Prevailing conditions (weather, swell, tide, current).

### Equipment

It is the responsibility of the Patrol Captain / Senior Lifeguard to ensure that all emergency equipment is in place and in working order.

Any damaged or missing equipment must be reported in the log, tagged and communicated ASAP to the Club Captain or Lifeguard Supervisor.

All patrolling equipment must be checked on each deployment, with specific attention to the condition and operability of power craft, rescue equipment, first aid and resuscitation equipment.

#### Powercraft

- Inflatable Rescue Boat (IRB) checks
- Side-by-Side Vehicle (SSV) checks
- 4WD Vehicle checks

#### Rescue Equipment

- Rescue board checks
- Rescue tube and fins checks

#### Oxygen Resuscitation Kits

- System test and miscellaneous equipment check.
- Check oxygen cylinder is over 1⁄2 full.
- It is strongly recommended that at least 1 full backup cylinder is available.

#### Defibrillators

- System test and miscellaneous equipment check.

#### First Aid Kits

- Condition and contents check

#### Radios

- Fully charged and operational and set to the correct channel(s) as per [SOP 8.1 - Beach Management Methods and Roles](#_8.1_Beach_Management).

### Patrol Sign On Procedure

The Patrol Captain / Senior Lifeguard must report to the SOC for a radio check when they have commenced patrol.

The Operations App is the primary method to update the patrol status (sign on/off) with radio as a backup.

## Reference

- [Public Safety and Aquatic Rescue training manual, 35th Edition, Module 10 – Patrol Operations](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/8571)