# 9.6 Lightning

## Purpose

To outline the procedure for lifesaving services in conditions where lightning strikes may occur.

In statistical terms, lightning poses a greater threat to individuals than most other natural hazards in Australia, accounting for five to ten lives lost and well over 100 injuries annually.

## The 30/30 Rule

The ‘30/30 Rule’ is recommended for lightning safety in the Australian Standard on Lightning Protection.

The ‘30/30 Rule requires that:

_when you see lightning, count the time until you hear thunder. If that is 30 seconds or less, the thunderstorm is close enough to be dangerous – seek shelter (if you can’t see the lightning, just hearing the thunder is a good back-up rule). Wait 30 minutes or more after the lightning flash before leaving shelter._

## Procedure

### Closure of Patrolled Area

Where the flash to bang count is less than 30 seconds, this indicates that the lightning is less than 10km away. In this circumstance, the following action should be taken:

- Patrol and surf-craft boundary flags should be dropped (patrol area closed).
- With an approaching thunderstorm, all persons should be advised to leave the water and clear the beach immediately. The patrol should retire to the shelter of the clubhouse/patrol base, maintaining a surveillance lookout from there.
- Seek shelter in a ‘hard top’ vehicle or building – avoid small structures, patrol shelters, fabric tents and isolated or small groups of trees.
- If isolated in the open, away from shelter, crouch down (preferably in a hollow) with feet together and remove metal objects from head and body. Do not lie down but avoid being the highest object in the vicinity.
- If swimming, surfing or in a boat leave the water immediately and seek shelter.
- In the event of a surf carnival or special event all effort should be made by the carnival Safety and Emergency Management Coordinator/referee and/or organisers to delay the event until the danger has passed or cancel/ postpone events completely.
- Avoid the use of portable radios and mobile telephones during a thunderstorm if in the open. If emergency calls are required keep them brief.
- SOC should be advised of the action being taken.

The Bureau of Meteorology app, installed on all SLSC and service tablets, can be used to monitor the severity/progression/ movement of nearby thunderstorms and can forecast movements up to 90 minutes into the future.

### Reopening of Patrolled Area

Reopen when 30 minutes have passed since the last lightning strike within 10km. A typical storm travels at about 40km/h. Waiting 30 minutes allows the thunderstorm to be approximately 20km away.

## Reference

- [SOP 9.1 – Emergency Patrol Area Closure and Evacuation](#_9.1_Emergency_Patrol)