# 8.4 Closure of Patrol (End of Patrol)

## Purpose

To outline best-practice procedure for closing a SLS service patrol for the day.

## Overview

The closure of a SLS service patrol at the end of the day requires effective communication to ensure a safe transition from supervised swimming to unsupervised swimming.

## Procedure

### Closure of a Flagged Patrol Area

1. Refer to Lifesaving Service Agreement and identify whether extended times (above minimum hours) are required due to patronage or conditions.
2. Inform the SOC of closure via the Operations App or if extending patrol operations 30 mins prior. Refer to [SOP 3.6 – Extension of Hours](#_3.6_Extension_of).
3. Consider using PA to advise swimmers
4. Consider utilising in-water SLS personnel to inform public of closure.
5. Consider a roving patrol to adjacent areas to inform public of closure.
6. Repeat communication of closure and warning of hazards to remaining swimmers if required.
7. Maintain surveillance of water by delegated SLS personnel while equipment is packed up for the day.
8. Maintain dedicated rescue equipment on-standby while other equipment is packed up for the day.
9. Prepare after-hour/call out response equipment (rescue-ready).
10. Conduct a final surveillance sweep of surf area before packing up standby equipment and leaving the beach.
11. Notify relevant personnel of any issues (i.e. equipment damage, consumable/fuel shortages etc).

### IRB Rescue Ready at Closure of Patrol

At the discretion of the Patrol Captain, it is permissible to remove an Inflatable Rescue Boat (IRB) from the beach no earlier than 30 minutes before the minimum closing time for maintenance tasks, such as washing, refuelling, and preparing it for after-hours or call-out responses. This process must adhere to the following conditions:

- The IRB driver and crew must remain in radio contact throughout the maintenance process. They must also be present and available until the minimum closing time is reached.
- The IRB, along with its driver and crew, must be kept in a rescue-ready status, ensuring a swift response if needed. For example, the IRB should be attached to a SSV or in a similarly accessible location.

## Reference

- [Public Safety and Aquatic Rescue training manual, 35th Edition, Module 10 – Patrol Operations, Concluding Patrol Operations](https://members.sls.com.au/members/document_library/1/media/8571)