---
section: Communications
nav_order: 3
title: 7.3 Radio Equipment Maintenance and Servicing
#topics: GitHub; Optional Software
---

## Purpose

To outline the recommended maintenance procedures for SLSSA radios.

## Overview

All radio equipment must be serviced every two years by a SLSSA endorsed service agent to ensure the integrity of equipment and lifesaving service provision.

## Procedure

### Radio Servicing and Preventative Maintenance

SLSCs must undertake annual checks to ensure that their radios are working properly.

The following equipment checks must be undertaken:

- Radio checks on all zones and channels (relevant to the area of operation) between two radios,
- General condition of the radio,
- Battery condition, and
- Labelled correctly (ID number on the screen on power up matches the label).

SLSCs must organise biennial servicing by a SLSSA endorsed service agent for any radios that are over 12 months old. During the servicing, the following equipment checks must be undertaken (at a minimum):

- Channel/frequency assignment,
- General condition of radio,
- Battery test, and
- Transmit power levels.

SLSCs and services must ensure that radios are kept in an appropriate condition to so that services can operate effectively.

#### Endorsed Service Agents

- CSE Crosscom, Regency Park.
- Any other party as directed by the State Officer (Communications)

### Radio Test

SLSCs and services must ensure that radios are kept in an appropriate condition to so that services can operate effectively.

SLSCs and services should conduct a series of preseason radio tests with the State Operations Centre (SOC) before the season starts.

Testing should commence no later than one month before the start of the season to enable issues to be identified and rectified so as to not inhibit lifesaving operations.

Testing must be organised with the SOC with at least 7 days notice.

### Radio Updates

All radios must be made available to the State Operations Centre for updates and/or inspection as directed by the State Officer (Communications).